<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd">
<!-- saved from url=(0034)http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed -->
<html><head><meta http-equiv="Content-Type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8"></head><body><pre>1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2013 Sep 16. [Epub ahead of print]

Implementation of cell-free biological networks at steady state.

Niederholtmeyer H, Stepanova V, Maerkl SJ.

Institute of Bioengineering, School of Engineering, École Polytechnique Fédérale 
de Lausanne, CH-1015 Lausanne, Switzerland.

Living cells maintain a steady state of biochemical reaction rates by exchanging 
energy and matter with the environment. These exchanges usually do not occur in
in vitro systems, which consequently go to chemical equilibrium. This in turn has
severely constrained the complexity of biological networks that can be
implemented in vitro. We developed nanoliter-scale microfluidic reactors that
exchange reagents at dilution rates matching those of dividing bacteria. In these
reactors we achieved transcription and translation at steady state for 30 h and
implemented diverse regulatory mechanisms on the transcriptional, translational, 
and posttranslational levels, including RNA polymerases, transcriptional
repression, translational activation, and proteolysis. We constructed and
implemented an in vitro genetic oscillator and mapped its phase diagram showing
that steady-state conditions were necessary to produce oscillations. This
reactor-based approach will allow testing of whether fundamental limits exist to 
in vitro network complexity.

PMID: 24043836  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


2. J Neuroimmune Pharmacol. 2013 Sep 17. [Epub ahead of print]

Identification of Novel MicroRNA Signatures Linked to Experimental Autoimmune
Myasthenia Gravis Pathogenesis: Down-Regulated miR-145 Promotes Pathogenetic Th17
Cell Response.

Wang J, Zheng S, Xin N, Dou C, Fu L, Zhang X, Chen J, Zhang Y, Geng D, Xiao C,
Cui G, Shen X, Lu Y, Wang J, Dong R, Qiao Y, Zhang Y.

Department of Neurology, The Affiliated Hospital of Xuzhou Medical College, 99
West Huai-hai Rd, Xuzhou, China, 221002.

Emerging evidence demonstrates that miRNAs, a new family of key mRNA regulatory
molecules, have crucial roles in controlling and modulating immunity. Their
contribution to myasthenia gravis (MG), a T cell-dependent, antibody-mediated
nervous system autoimmune disease, has not been thoroughly investigated. In the
present study, using a highly sensitive microarray-based approach, we identified 
11 miRNAs with differential expression between Peripheral Blood Mononuclear Cells
(PBMC) from experimental autoimmune MG (EAMG) rats and control rats. miR-145 is
one of the most significantly down-regulated miRNAs in PBMC from EAMG rats.
Down-regulation of miR-145 expression was confirmed in PBMC and CD4+CD25- T cells
(T effector cells) from both EAMG rats and MG patients by real-time PCR.
Bioinformatics target prediction identified two crucial immune-related
molecules-CD28 and NFATc1, as putative targets of miR-145. Furthermore, miR-145
inhibited CD28 and NFATc1 expression by directly targeting their 3'-UTRs, which
was abolished by mutation of the miR-145 and CD28/NFATc1 binding sites. In vitro 
up-regulation of miR-145 in CD4+ T cells can significantly reduce CD28 protein
levels accompanied by decreased proliferative response. In a dendritic cell
(DC)-T cell coculture system, overexpression of miR-145 in AChR-specific CD4+ T
cells suppresses NFATc1 expression and T Helper 17 cells level. Finally, we
observed that administration of lentiviral-miR-145 decreased the severity of
ongoing, established EAMG with decreased IL-17 production, and also decreased
serum anti-AChR IgG levels. Our studies provide an important new insight into the
pathogenesis of EAMG and MG, which may open a new perspective for the development
of effective gene therapy for EAMG/MG.

PMID: 24043548  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


3. Mol Cell Proteomics. 2013 Sep 16. [Epub ahead of print]

Transcriptomic messiness in the venom duct of Conus miles contributes to
conotoxin diversity.

Jin AH, Dutertre S, Kaas Q, Lavergne V, Kubala P, Lewis RJ, Alewood PF.

Institute for Molecular Bioscience, Australia.

Marine cone snails have developed sophisticated chemical strategies to capture
prey and defend against predators. Among the vast array of bioactive molecules in
their venom, the peptide components called conotoxins or conopeptides dominate,
with many binding with high affinity and selectivity to a broad range of cellular
targets, including receptors and transporters of the nervous system. Whereas, the
conopeptide gene precursor organisation has a conserved topology, the peptides in
the venom duct are highly processed. Indeed, deep sequencing transcriptomics has 
uncovered on average less than 100 toxin gene precursors per species, while
advanced proteomics has revealed &gt; 10-fold greater diversity at the peptide
level. In the present study, second generation sequencing technologies coupled to
highly sensitive mass spectrometry methods were applied to rapidly uncover the
conopeptide diversity in the venom of a worm hunting species, Conus miles. A
total of 662 putative conopeptide encoded sequences were retrieved from
transcriptomic data, comprising 48 validated conotoxin sequences that clustered
into 10 gene superfamilies, including 3 novel superfamilies and a novel cysteine 
framework (C-C-C-CCC-C-C) identified at both transcript and peptide levels. A
surprisingly large number of conopeptide gene sequences were expressed at
low-levels, including a series of single amino acid variants, as well as
sequences containing deletions and frame and stop codon shifts. Some of the toxin
variants generate alternative cleavage sites, interrupted or elongated cysteine
frameworks, and highly variable isoforms within families that could be identified
at the peptide level. Together with the variable peptide processing identified
previously, background genetic and phenotypic levels of biological messiness in
venoms contributes to the hypervariability of venom peptides and their ability to
rapidly evolve.

PMID: 24043424  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


4. Glycobiology. 2013 Sep 16. [Epub ahead of print]

Common recognition principles across diverse sequence and structural families of 
sialic acid binding proteins.

Bhagavat R, Chandra N.

Department of Biochemistry, Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore.

Sialic acids form a large family of 9-carbon monosaccharides and are integral
components of glycoconjugates. They are known to bind to a wide range of
receptors belonging to diverse sequence families and fold classes, and are key
mediators in a plethora of cellular processes. Thus, it is of great interest to
understand the features that give rise to such a recognition capability.
Structural analyses using a non-redundant dataset of known sialic acid binding
proteins was carried out, which included exhaustive binding site comparisons and 
site alignments using in-house algorithms, followed by clustering and tree
computation, which has led to derivation of sialic acid recognition
principles.Although the proteins in the dataset belong to several sequence and
structure families, their binding sites could be grouped into only six types.
Structural comparison of the binding sites indicate that all sites contain one or
more different combinations of key structural features over a common scaffold.
The six binding site types thus serve as structural motifs for recognising sialic
acid. Scanning the motifs against a non-redundant set of binding sites from PDB
indicated the motifs to be specific for sialic acid recognition. Knowledge of
determinants obtained from this study will be useful for detecting function in
unknown proteins. As an example analysis, a genome-wide scan for the motifs in
structures of M.tuberculosis proteome, identified 17 hits that contain
combinations of the features, suggesting a possible function of sialic acid
binding by these proteins.

PMID: 24043392  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


5. BioDrugs. 2013 Sep 17. [Epub ahead of print]

CD30 as a Therapeutic Target for Lymphoma.

Schirrmann T, Steinwand M, Wezler X, Ten Haaf A, Tur MK, Barth S.

Department of Biotechnology, Institute of Biochemistry, Biotechnology and
Bioinformatics, Technische Universität Braunschweig, Spielmannstr. 7, 38106,
Braunschweig, Germany, th.schirrmann@tu-bs.de.

Hodgkin's lymphoma (HL) and ALK(+) anaplastic large-cell lymphoma (ALCL) have
become highly curable due to the success of modern regimens of chemotherapy and
radiotherapy. However, up to one-third of the patients experience relapse or do
not respond to first-line therapy, and half of them relapse again after secondary
therapy with limited options for further treatment. In the last 15&nbsp;years,
monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) directed to surface receptors became a new and
valuable therapeutic option in many hematologic malignancies. Due to its
restricted expression on normal activated lymphocytes and its high expression on 
malignant cells, CD30 represents an attractive target molecule for HL and ALCL
therapy. However, unconjugated CD30 mAbs have demonstrated a lack of objective
clinical responses in patients with recurrent HL. CD30 exhibits complex signaling
pathways, and binding of its natural ligand or anti-CD30 mAbs can induce
apoptosis but may also promote proliferation and activation depending on the
cellular context. Moreover, CD30 rapidly internalizes after crosslinking, which
counteracts efficient recruitment of immunologic effectors but also provides the 
opportunity to transfer cytotoxic payloads coupled to CD30-specific mAbs into the
tumor cells. Several tumor targeting approaches have been studied, including
radio-immunoconjugates, immunotoxins, immunoRNases, immunokinases, and antibody
drug conjugates (ADCs). In 2011, the ADC brentuximab-vedotin, consisting of the
CD30-specific chimeric mAb cAC10 and the potent tubulin toxin monomethyl
auristatin E, gained regulatory approval as a well tolerated and highly active
drug in patients with refractory and relapsed HL and ALCL. SGN-35 is on the way
to being incorporated in the standard management of CD30(+) lymphoma with
significant therapeutic impact. This review gives a critical overview about
anti-CD30 therapies with unconjugated, engineered, and conjugated mAbs and the
therapeutic challenges of treatment of CD30(+) lymphoma.

PMID: 24043362  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


6. Oncogenesis. 2013 Sep 16;2:e70. doi: 10.1038/oncsis.2013.30.

Protooncogene TCL1b functions as an Akt kinase co-activator that exhibits
oncogenic potency in vivo.

Hashimoto M, Suizu F, Tokuyama W, Noguchi H, Hirata N, Matsuda-Lennikov M,
Edamura T, Masuzawa M, Gotoh N, Tanaka S, Noguchi M.

Division of Cancer Biology, Institute for Genetic Medicine, Hokkaido University, 
Sapporo, Japan.

Protooncogene T-cell leukemia 1 (TCL1), which is implicated in human T-cell
prolymphocytic leukemia (T-PLL), interacts with Akt and enhances its kinase
activity, functioning as an Akt kinase co-activator. Two major isoforms of TCL1
Protooncogenes (TCL1 and TCL1b) are present adjacent to each other on human
chromosome 14q.32. In human T-PLL, both TCL1 and TCL1b are activated by
chromosomal translocation. Moreover, TCL1b-transgenic mice have never been
created. Therefore, it remains unclear whether TCL1b itself, independent of TCL1,
exhibits oncogenicity. In co-immunoprecipitation assays, both ectopic and
endogenous TCL1b interacted with Akt. In in vitro Akt kinase assays, TCL1b
enhanced Akt kinase activity in dose- and time-dependent manners. Bioinformatics 
approaches utilizing multiregression analysis, cluster analysis, KEGG (Kyoto
Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes) pathway mapping, Venn diagrams and Gene
Ontology (GO) demonstrated that TCL1b showed highly homologous gene-induction
signatures similar to Myr-Akt or TCL1. TCL1b exhibited oncogenicity in in vitro
colony-transformation assay. Further, two independent lines of β-actin
promoter-driven TCL1b-transgenic mice developed angiosarcoma on the intestinal
tract. Angiosarcoma is a rare form of cancer in humans with poor prognosis. Using
immunohistochemistry, 11 out of 13 human angiosarcoma samples were positively
stained with both anti-TCL1b and anti-phospho-Akt antibodies. Consistently, in
various cancer tissues, 69 out of 146 samples were positively stained with
anti-TCL1b, out of which 46 were positively stained with anti-phospho-Akt
antibodies. Moreover, TCL1b structure-based inhibitor 'TCL1b-Akt-in' inhibited
Akt kinase activity in in vitro kinase assays and PDGF (platelet-derived growth
factor)-induced Akt kinase activities-in turn, 'TCL1b-Akt-in' inhibited cellular 
proliferation of sarcoma. The current study disclosed TCL1b bears oncogenicity
and hence serves as a novel therapeutic target for human neoplastic diseases.

PMID: 24042734  [PubMed]


7. Dalton Trans. 2013 Sep 16. [Epub ahead of print]

Facile synthesis of carbon nanotube-inorganic hybrid materials with improved
photoactivity.

Yu Y, Chen J, Zhou ZM, Zhao YD.

Britton Chance Center for Biomedical Photonics at Wuhan National Laboratory for
Optoelectronics - Hubei Bioinformatics &amp; Molecular Imaging Key Laboratory,
Department of Biomedical Engineering, College of Life Science and Technology,
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan 430074, P. R. China.
zydi@mail.hust.edu.cn.

A facile method was used for the synthesis of CNTs@TiO2 nanocomposites using a
simple apparatus at ambient pressure and temperature. CNTs@TiO2 exhibit
core-shell structure without any interfacial adhesive layer on the CNT surface.
The photodegradation of methyl orange suggests enhanced photoactivity of
CNTs@TiO2 under UV light. The morphology, structure and composition of CNTs@TiO2 
were also investigated.

PMID: 24042506  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


8. BMJ Open. 2013 Sep 16;3(9):e003223. doi: 10.1136/bmjopen-2013-003223.

Internet-based hearing screening using speech-in-noise: validation and
comparisons of self-reported hearing problems, quality of life and phonological
representation.

Molander P, Nordqvist P, Oberg M, Lunner T, Lyxell B, Andersson G.

Department of Behavioural Sciences and Learning, Linnaeus Centre HEAD, Swedish
Institute for Disability Research, Linköping University, Linköping, Sweden.

OBJECTIVES: For the last decade a host of different projects have been launched
to allow persons who are concerned about their hearing status to quickly and at a
low cost test their hearing ability. Most often, this is&nbsp;carried out without
collecting complementary information that could be correlated with hearing
impairment. In this two-part study we first, present the development and
validation of a novel Internet-based hearing test, and second, report on the
associations between this test and phonological representation, quality of life
and self-reported hearing difficulties.
DESIGN: Cross-sectional study.
SETTING: An opportunity sample of participants was recruited at the Stockholm
central station for the first study. All parts of the second study were conducted
via the Internet, with testing and self-report forms adapted for online use.
PARTICIPANTS: The first part of the study was carried out in direct contact with 
the participants, and participants from the second study were recruited by means 
of advertisements in newspapers and on webpages. The only exclusion criterion was
that participants had to be over 18 years old. Most participants were between 60 
and 69 years old. There were almost an equal number of men and women (total
n=316).
OUTCOME MEASURES: 48 participants failed the Internet-based hearing screening
test. The group failing the test reported more problems on the Amsterdam
Inventory of Auditory Disability. In addition, they were found to have diminished
phonological representational skills. However, no difference in quality of life
was found.
CONCLUSIONS: Almost one in five participants was in need of contacting their
local hearing clinic. This group had more complaints regarding tinnitus and
hyperacusis, rated their own hearing as worse than those who passed, and had a
poorer capability of generating accurate phonological representations. This study
suggests that it is feasible to screen for hearing status online, and obtain
valid data.

PMID: 24041846  [PubMed]


9. Theriogenology. 2013 Sep 13. pii: S0093-691X(13)00330-0. doi:
10.1016/j.theriogenology.2013.08.007. [Epub ahead of print]

Cloning and transcriptional activity of ovarian-specific promoter in dairy goats.

Bai L, Liu X, Fang F, Zhang L, Zhao H, Peng J, Cao B.

College of Animal Science and Technology, Northwest A&amp;F University, Yangling,
Shaanxi, PR China.

Ovarian-specific promoter (OSP) is a tissue-specific promoter only expressed in
the ovary to regulate its development. To investigate the activity of OSP in
diverse dairy goat cells, OSP was cloned from dairy goat genome and used to
construct the luciferase reporter vector pGL3-OSP to examine the transcriptional 
activity of OSP. Consequently, a 461-bp OSP fragment was obtained. Bioinformatics
analysis indicated that the fragment contained multiple transcription factor
binding sites, such as SRY, HSF, AP-1, C/EBP, CAAT, TATA, and so on, and the
nucleotide sequence of OSP shared 99% and 97% similarity with those of OSP-1 and 
OSP-2 in rat. In addition, two variants were identified in the OSP (g.164T was
deletion and g.375T&lt;C). In diverse cells, the expression of luciferase in ovarian
granulosa cells (GCs) and stromal cells of ovarian cortex was extremely
significantly higher than that in fetal fibroblasts and oviduct epithelial cells.
Meanwhile, the expression of luciferase in ovarian GCs was extremely
significantly higher than that in the stromal cells of ovarian cortex. In
summary, we successfully extracted dairy goat OSP and identified its
transcriptional activity, which in part shed light on the study of
ovarian-specific transcription and provided further insights into the development
and regulation of dairy goat's ovary as well.

Crown Copyright © 2013. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24041824  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


10. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2013 Sep 13. pii: S0005-2728(13)00148-5. doi:
10.1016/j.bbabio.2013.09.002. [Epub ahead of print]

Relevance of rhodopsin studies for GPCR activation.

Deupi X.

Condensed Matter Theory Group and Laboratory of Biomolecular Research, Paul
Scherrer Institute, WHGA/106, CH-5232 Villigen PSI, Switzerland.

Rhodopsin, the dim-light photoreceptor present in the rod cells of the retina, is
both a retinal-binding protein and a G protein-coupled receptor (GPCR). Due to
this conjunction, it benefits of an arsenal of spectroscopy techniques that can
be used for its characterization, while being a model system for the important
family of Class A (also referred to as "rhodopsin-like") GPCRs. For instance,
rhodopsin has been a crucial player in the field of GPCR structural biology.
Until 2007, it was the only GPCR for which a high-resolution crystal structure
was available, so all structure-activity analyses on GPCRs, from structure-based 
drug discovery to studies of structural changes upon activation, were based on
rhodopsin. At present, about a third of currently available GPCR structures are
still from rhodopsin. In this review, I show some examples of how these
structures can still be used to gain insight into general aspects of GPCR
activation. First, the analysis of the third intracellular loop in rhodopsin
structures allows to gain understanding of the structural and dynamic properties 
of this region, which is absent (due to protein engineering or poor electron
density) in most of the currently available GPCR structures. Second, a detailed
analysis of the structure of the transmembrane domains in inactive, intermediate 
and active rhodopsin structures allows to detect early conformational changes in 
the process of ligand-induced GPCR activation. Finally, the analysis of a
conserved ligand-activated transmission switch in the transmembrane bundle of
GPCRs in the context of the rhodopsin activation cycle, allows to suggest that
the structures of many of the currently available agonist-bound GPCRs may
correspond to intermediate active states. While the focus in GPCR structural
biology is inevitably moving away from rhodopsin, in other aspects rhodopsin is
still at the forefront. For instance, the first studies of the structural basis
of disease mutants in GPCRs, or the most detailed analysis of cellular GPCR
signal transduction networks using a systems biology approach, have been carried 
out in rhodopsin. Finally, due again to its unique properties among GPCRs,
rhodopsin will likely play an important role in the application of X-ray free
electron laser crystallography to time-resolved structural biology in membrane
proteins. Rhodopsin, thus, still remains relevant as a model system to study the 
molecular mechanisms of GPCR activation. This article is part of a Special Issue 
entitled: Retinal Proteins - You can teach an old dog new tricks.

© 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24041646  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


11. Curr Drug Targets. 2013 Sep 17. [Epub ahead of print]

Proteomic and Bioinformatic Analysis of Trypanosoma Cruzi Chemotherapy and
Potential Drug Targets: New Pieces for an Old Puzzle.

Rubem Figueiredo Sadok Menna-Barreto EY, Belloze KT, Perales J, Silva-Jr FP.

Laboratório de Bioquímica de Proteínas e Peptídeos, Instituto Oswaldo Cruz,
FIOCRUZ, Av. Brasil 4365 - 21040-360, Manguinhos, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.
floriano@ioc.fiocruz.br.

Chagas disease is endemic in Latin America and is caused by the protozoan
hemoflagellate parasite Trypanosoma cruzi. Nowadays, it has also been
disseminated to non-endemic countries due to the ease of global mobility. The
nitroheterocycle benznidazole is currently used to treat this neglected tropical 
disease, although this drug causes severe side effects and has limited efficacy
during the chronic phase of the disease. Proteomics and bioinformatics have
recently become powerful tools in the identification of new drug targets. In the 
last decade, proteomic profiles of different T. cruzi forms under distinct
experimental conditions were assessed. These reports have pointed to many
potential drug targets, with ergosterol biosynthesis-related proteins and redox
system enzymes being the most promising candidates. Nevertheless, the majority of
the compounds active against T. cruzi still have unclear mechanisms of action,
and most proteomic efforts have studied epimastigotes (the non-clinically
relevant insect form of the parasite). Additional analyses with the clinically
relevant parasite forms should be performed to identify proteins that actually
bind drugs active against T. cruzi. Nonetheless, due to the known technical
hurdles in generating such experimental data, bioinformatic approaches that
integrate currently available data to generate additional knowledge will also be 
useful. Here, we review T. cruzi proteomics and describe the main chemoproteomic 
methods and their application to the identification of trypanosomatid drug
targets. Finally, we discuss the potential benefits of more extensively
integrating all proteomic data with other molecular databases via bioinformatic
analyses to develop novel, viable strategies for alternative treatments of Chagas
disease.

PMID: 24041335  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


12. Hum Genomics. 2013 Sep 16;7(1):19. [Epub ahead of print]

Role of conserved cis-regulatory elements in the post-transcriptional regulation 
of the human MECP2 gene involved in autism.

Bagga JS, D Antonio LA.

BACKGROUND: The MECP2 gene codes for methyl CpG binding protein 2 which regulates
activities of other genes in the early development of the brain. Mutations in
this gene have been associated with Rett syndrome, a form of autism. The purpose 
of this study was to investigate the role of evolutionarily conserved
cis-elements in regulating the post-transcriptional expression of the MECP2 gene 
and to explore their possible correlations with a mutation that is known to cause
mental retardation.
RESULTS: A bioinformatics approach was used to map evolutionarily conserved
cis-regulatory elements in the transcribed regions of the human MECP2 gene and
its mammalian orthologs. Cis-regulatory motifs including G-quadruplexes, microRNA
target sites, and AU-rich elements have gained significant importance because of 
their role in key biological processes and as therapeutic targets. We discovered 
in the 5[prime]-UTR (untranslated region) of MECP2 mRNA a highly conserved
G-quadruplex which overlapped a known deletion in Rett syndrome patients with
decreased levels of MeCP2 protein. We believe that this 5[prime]-UTR G-quadruplex
could be involved in regulating MECP2 translation. We mapped additional
evolutionarily conserved G-quadruplexes, microRNA target sites, and AU-rich
elements in the key sections of both untranslated regions. Our studies suggest
the regulation of translation, mRNA turnover, and development-related alternative
MECP2 polyadenylation, putatively involving interactions of conserved
cis-regulatory elements with their respective trans factors and complex
interactions among the trans factors themselves. We discovered highly conserved
G-quadruplex motifs that were more prevalent near alternative splice sites as
compared to the constitutive sites of the MECP2 gene. We also identified a pair
of overlapping G-quadruplexes at an alternative 5[prime] splice site that could
potentially regulate alternative splicing in a negative as well as a positive way
in the MECP2 pre-mRNAs.
CONCLUSIONS: A Rett syndrome mutation with decreased protein expression was found
to be associated with a conserved G-quadruplex. Our studies suggest that MECP2
post-transcriptional gene expression could be regulated by several evolutionarily
conserved cis-elements like G-quadruplex motifs, microRNA target sites, and
AU-rich elements. This phylogenetic analysis has provided some interesting and
valuable insights into the regulation of the MECP2 gene involved in autism.

PMID: 24040966  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


13. BMC Genomics. 2013 Sep 16;14(1):625. [Epub ahead of print]

Stem cells isolated from adipose tissue of obese patients show changes in their
transcriptomic profile that indicate loss in stemcellness and increased
commitment to an adipocyte-like phenotype.

Oñate B, Vilahur G, Camino-López S, Díez-Caballero A, Ballesta-López C, Ybarra J,
Moscatiello F, Herrero J, Badimon L.

BACKGROUND: The adipose tissue is an endocrine regulator and a risk factor for
atherosclerosis and cardiovascular disease when by excessive accumulation induces
obesity. Although the adipose tissue is also a reservoir for stem cells (ASC)
their function and "stemcellness" has been questioned. Our aim was to investigate
the mechanisms by which obesity affects subcutaneous white adipose tissue (WAT)
stem cells.
RESULTS: Transcriptomics, in silico analysis, real-time polymerase chain reaction
(PCR) and western blots were performed on isolated stem cells from subcutaneous
abdominal WAT of morbidly obese patients (ASCmo) and of non-obese individuals
(ASCn). ASCmo and ASCn gene expression clustered separately from each other.
ASCmo showed downregulation of "stemness" genes and upregulation of adipogenic
and inflammatory genes with respect to ASCn. Moreover, the application of
bioinformatics and Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA) showed that the transcription
factor Smad3 was tentatively affected in obese ASCmo. Validation of this target
confirmed a significantly reduced Smad3 nuclear translocation in the isolated
ASCmo.
CONCLUSIONS: The transcriptomic profile of the stem cells reservoir in obese
subcutaneous WAT is highly modified with significant changes in genes regulating 
stemcellness, lineage commitment and inflammation. In addition to body mass
index, cardiovascular risk factor clustering further affect the ASC
transcriptomic profile inducing loss of multipotency and, hence, capacity for
tissue repair. In summary, the stem cells in the subcutaneous WAT niche of obese 
patients are already committed to adipocyte differentiation and show an
upregulated inflammatory gene expression associated to their loss of
stemcellness.

PMID: 24040759  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


14. Helicobacter. 2013 Sep;18 Suppl 1:1-4. doi: 10.1111/hel.12069.

Helicobacter pylori in 2013: Multiplying Genomes, Emerging Insights.

Ahmed N, Loke MF, Kumar N, Vadivelu J.

Pathogen Biology Laboratory, Department of Biotechnology and Bioinformatics,
University of Hyderabad, Hyderabad, 500046, India; Institute of Biological
Sciences, University of Malaya, Kuala Lumpur, 50603, Malaysia.

We describe features of key additions to the existing pool of publicly accessible
Helicobacter pylori genome sequences and sequences of Helicobacter pylori phages 
from April 2012 to March 2013. In addition, important studies involving H.&nbsp;pylori
genomes, especially those pertaining to genomic diversity, disease outcome,
H.&nbsp;pylori population structure and evolution are reviewed. High degree of
homologous recombination contributes to increased diversity of H.&nbsp;pylori genomes.
New methods of resolving H.&nbsp;pylori population structure to an ultrafine level led
to the proposal of new subpopulations. As the magnitude of diversity in the
H.&nbsp;pylori gene pool becomes more and more clear, geographic and demographic
factors should be brought to analysis while identifying disease-specific
biomarkers and defining new virulence mechanisms.

© 2013 John Wiley &amp; Sons Ltd.

PMID: 24011237  [PubMed - in process]


15. PLoS Negl Trop Dis. 2013 Sep 5;7(9):e2408. doi: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0002408.

Hookworm infection and environmental factors in mbeya region, Tanzania: a
cross-sectional, population-based study.

Riess H, Clowes P, Kroidl I, Kowuor DO, Nsojo A, Mangu C, Schüle SA, Mansmann U, 
Geldmacher C, Mhina S, Maboko L, Hoelscher M, Saathoff E.

Division of Infectious Diseases and Tropical Medicine, Medical Center of the
University of Munich, Munich, Germany ; Institute for Medical Bioinformatics,
Biometry, and Epidemiology, Ludwig-Maximilians-University, Munich, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Hookworm disease is one of the most common infections and cause of a 
high disease burden in the tropics and subtropics. Remotely sensed ecological
data and model-based geostatistics have been used recently to identify areas in
need for hookworm control.
METHODOLOGY: Cross-sectional interview data and stool samples from 6,375
participants from nine different sites in Mbeya region, south-western Tanzania,
were collected as part of a cohort study. Hookworm infection was assessed by
microscopy of duplicate Kato-Katz thick smears from one stool sample from each
participant. A geographic information system was used to obtain remotely sensed
environmental data such as land surface temperature (LST), vegetation cover,
rainfall, and elevation, and combine them with hookworm infection data and with
socio-demographic and behavioral data. Uni- and multivariable logistic regression
was performed on sites separately and on the pooled dataset.
PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Univariable analyses yielded significant associations for all
ecological variables. Five ecological variables stayed significant in the final
multivariable model: population density (odds ratio (OR) = 0.68; 95% confidence
interval (CI) = 0.63-0.73), mean annual vegetation density (OR = 0.11; 95%
CI = 0.06-0.18), mean annual LST during the day (OR = 0.81; 95% CI = 0.75-0.88), 
mean annual LST during the night (OR = 1.54; 95% CI = 1.44-1.64), and latrine
coverage in household surroundings (OR = 1.02; 95% CI = 1.01-1.04). Interaction
terms revealed substantial differences in associations of hookworm infection with
population density, mean annual enhanced vegetation index, and latrine coverage
between the two sites with the highest prevalence of infection.
CONCLUSION/SIGNIFICANCE: This study supports previous findings that remotely
sensed data such as vegetation indices, LST, and elevation are strongly
associated with hookworm prevalence. However, the results indicate that the
influence of environmental conditions can differ substantially within a
relatively small geographic area. The use of large-scale associations as a
predictive tool on smaller scales is therefore problematic and should be handled 
with care.

PMID: 24040430  [PubMed - in process]


16. PLoS One. 2013 Sep 6;8(9):e75080. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0075080.

IBC CARe Microarray Allelic Population Prevalences in an American Indian
Population.

Best LG, Anderson CM, Saxena R, Almoguera B, Chandrupatla H, Martin C, Falcon G, 
Keplin K, Pearson N, Keating BJ.

Science Department, Turtle Mountain Community College, Belcourt, North Dakota,
United States of America ; School of Medicine and Health Sciences, University of 
North Dakota, Grand Forks, North Dakota, United States of America.

BACKGROUND: The prevalence of variant alleles among single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) is not well known for many minority populations. These
population allele frequencies (PAFs) are necessary to guide genetic epidemiology 
studies and to understand the population specific contribution of these variants 
to disease risk. Large differences in PAF among certain functional groups of
genes could also indicate possible selection pressure or founder effects of
interest. The 50K SNP, custom genotyping microarray (CARe) was developed,
focusing on about 2,000 candidate genes and pathways with demonstrated
pathophysiologic influence on cardiovascular disease (CVD).
METHODS: The CARe microarray was used to genotype 216 unaffected controls in a
study of pre-eclampsia among a Northern Plains, American Indian tribe. The
allelic prevalences of 34,240 SNPs suitable for analysis, were determined and
compared with corresponding HapMap prevalences for the Caucasian population.
Further analysis was conducted to compare the frequency of statistically
different prevalences among functionally related SNPs, as determined by the DAVID
Bioinformatics Resource.
RESULTS: Of the SNPs with PAFs in both datasets, 9.8%,37.2% and 47.1% showed
allele frequencies among the American Indian population greater than, less than
and either greater or less than (respectively) the HapMap Caucasian population.
The 2,547 genes were divided into 53 functional groups using the highest
stringency criteria. While none of these groups reached the Bonferroni corrected 
p value of 0.00094, there were 7 of these 53 groups with significantly more or
less differing PAFs, each with a probability of less than 0.05 and an overall
probability of 0.0046.
CONCLUSION: In comparison to the HapMap Caucasian population, there are
substantial differences in the prevalence among an American Indian community of
SNPs related to CVD. Certain functional groups of genes and related SNPs show
possible evidence of selection pressure or founder effects.

PMID: 24040389  [PubMed - in process]


17. PLoS One. 2013 Sep 9;8(9):e75012. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0075012.

Differentially Expressed MicroRNAs in Chondrocytes from Distinct Regions of
Developing Human Cartilage.

McAlinden A, Varghese N, Wirthlin L, Chang LW.

Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Washington University, St Louis, Missouri,
United States of America ; Department of Cell Biology and Physiology, Washington 
University, St Louis, Missouri, United States of America.

There is compelling in vivo evidence from reports on human genetic mutations and 
transgenic mice that some microRNAs (miRNAs) play an important functional role in
regulating skeletal development and growth. A number of published in vitro
studies also point toward a role for miRNAs in controlling chondrocyte gene
expression and differentiation. However, information on miRNAs that may regulate 
a specific phase of chondrocyte differentiation (i.e. production of progenitor,
differentiated or hypertrophic chondrocytes) is lacking. To attempt to bridge
this knowledge gap, we have investigated miRNA expression patterns in human
embryonic cartilage tissue. Specifically, a developmental time point was
selected, prior to endochondral ossification in the embryonic limb, to permit
analysis of three distinct populations of chondrocytes. The location of
chondroprogenitor cells, differentiated chondrocytes and hypertrophic
chondrocytes in gestational day 54-56 human embryonic limb tissue sections was
confirmed both histologically and by specific collagen expression patterns. Laser
capture microdissection was utilized to separate the three chondrocyte
populations and a miRNA profiling study was carried out using TaqMan® OpenArray® 
Human MicroRNA Panels (Applied Biosystems®). Here we report on abundantly
expressed miRNAs in human embryonic cartilage tissue and, more importantly, we
have identified miRNAs that are significantly differentially expressed between
precursor, differentiated and hypertrophic chondrocytes by 2-fold or more. Some
of the miRNAs identified in this study have been described in other aspects of
cartilage or bone biology, while others have not yet been reported in
chondrocytes. Finally, a bioinformatics approach was applied to begin to decipher
developmental cellular pathways that may be regulated by groups of differentially
expressed miRNAs during distinct stages of chondrogenesis. Data obtained from
this work will serve as an important resource of information for the field of
cartilage biology and will enhance our understanding of miRNA-driven mechanisms
regulating cartilage and endochondral bone development, regeneration and repair.

PMID: 24040378  [PubMed - in process]


18. PLoS One. 2013 Sep 9;8(9):e74562. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0074562.

Integrative Bioinformatics Links HNF1B with Clear Cell Carcinoma and
Tumor-Associated Thrombosis.

Cuff J, Salari K, Clarke N, Esheba GE, Forster AD, Huang S, West RB, Higgins JP, 
Longacre TA, Pollack JR.

Department of Pathology, Stanford University, Stanford, California, United States
of America.

Clear cell carcinoma (CCC) is a histologically distinct carcinoma subtype that
arises in several organ systems and is marked by cytoplasmic clearing, attributed
to abundant intracellular glycogen. Previously, transcription factor hepatocyte
nuclear factor 1-beta (HNF1B) was identified as a biomarker of ovarian CCC. Here,
we set out to explore more broadly the relation between HNF1B and carcinomas with
clear cell histology. HNF1B expression, evaluated by immunohistochemistry, was
significantly associated with clear cell histology across diverse gynecologic and
renal carcinomas (P&lt;0.001), as was hypomethylation of the HNF1B promoter
(P&lt;0.001). From microarray analysis, an empirically-derived HNF1B signature was
significantly enriched for computationally-predicted targets (with HNF1 binding
sites) (P&lt;0.03), as well as genes associated with glycogen metabolism, including 
glucose-6-phophatase, and strikingly the blood clotting cascade, including
fibrinogen, prothrombin and factor XIII. Enrichment of the clotting cascade was
also evident in microarray data from ovarian CCC versus other histotypes
(P&lt;0.01), and HNF1B-associated prothrombin expression was verified by
immunohistochemistry (P = 0.015). Finally, among gynecologic carcinomas with
cytoplasmic clearing, HNF1B immunostaining was linked to a 3.0-fold increased
risk of clinically-significant venous thrombosis (P = 0.043), and with a 2.3-fold
increased risk (P = 0.011) in a combined gynecologic and renal carcinoma cohort. 
Our results define HNF1B as a broad marker of clear cell phenotype, and support a
mechanistic link to glycogen accumulation and thrombosis, possibly reflecting
(for gynecologic CCC) derivation from secretory endometrium. Our findings also
implicate a novel mechanism of tumor-associated thrombosis (a major cause of
cancer mortality), based on the direct production of clotting factors by cancer
cells.

PMID: 24040285  [PubMed - in process]


19. PLoS One. 2013 Sep 9;8(9):e74506. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0074506.

The VHSE-Based Prediction of Proteasomal Cleavage Sites.

Xie J, Xu Z, Zhou S, Pan X, Cai S, Yang L, Mei H.

Key Laboratory of Dependence Service Computing in Cyber Physical Society,
Ministry of Education, Chongqing, China ; College of Computer Science, Chongqing 
University, Chongqing, China.

Prediction of proteasomal cleavage sites has been a focus of computational
biology. Up to date, the predictive methods are mostly based on nonlinear
classifiers and variables with little physicochemical meanings. In this paper,
the physicochemical properties of 14 residues both upstream and downstream of a
cleavage site are characterized by VHSE (principal component score vector of
hydrophobic, steric, and electronic properties) descriptors. Then, the resulting 
VHSE descriptors are employed to construct prediction models by support vector
machine (SVM). For both in vivo and in vitro datasets, the performance of
VHSE-based method is comparatively better than that of the well-known PAProC,
MAPPP, and NetChop methods. The results reveal that the hydrophobic property of
10 residues both upstream and downstream of the cleavage site is a dominant
factor affecting in vivo and in vitro cleavage specificities, followed by
residue's electronic and steric properties. Furthermore, the difference in
hydrophobic potential between residues flanking the cleavage site is proposed to 
favor substrate cleavages. Overall, the interpretable VHSE-based method provides 
a preferable way to predict proteasomal cleavage sites.

PMID: 24040264  [PubMed - in process]


20. PLoS One. 2013 Sep 5;8(9):e74275. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0074275.

FastDMA: An Infinium HumanMethylation450 Beadchip Analyzer.

Wu D, Gu J, Zhang MQ.

Bioinformatics Division/Center for Synthetic and Systems Biology, Tsinghua
National Laboratory for Information Science and Technology (TNLIST), Department
of Automation, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China.

DNA methylation is vital for many essential biological processes and human
diseases. Illumina Infinium HumanMethylation450 Beadchip is a recently developed 
platform studying genome-wide DNA methylation state on more than 480,000 CpG
sites and a few CHG sites with high data quality. To analyze the data of this
promising platform, we developed FastDMA which can be used to identify
significantly differentially methylated probes. Besides single probe analysis,
FastDMA can also do region-based analysis for identifying the differentially
methylated region (DMRs). A uniformed statistical model, analysis of covariance
(ANCOVA), is used to achieve all the analyses in FastDMA. We apply FastDMA on
three large-scale DNA methylation datasets from The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA)
and find many differentially methylated genomic sites in different types of
cancer. On the testing datasets, FastDMA shows much higher computational
efficiency than current tools. FastDMA can benefit the data analyses of
large-scale DNA methylation studies with an integrative pipeline and a high
computational efficiency. The software is freely available via
http://bioinfo.au.tsinghua.edu.cn/software/fastdma/.

PMID: 24040221  [PubMed - in process]


21. PLoS One. 2013 Sep 5;8(9):e74271. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0074271.

Experimentally Validated Novel Inhibitors of Helicobacter pylori
Phosphopantetheine Adenylyltransferase Discovered by Virtual High-Throughput
Screening.

Cheng CS, Jia KF, Chen T, Chang SY, Lin MS, Yin HS.

Institute of Bioinformatics and Structural Biology and College of Life Sciences, 
National Tsing Hua University, Hsinchu, Taiwan.

Helicobacter pylori is a major etiologic agent associated with the development
and maintenance of&nbsp;human gastritis. The goal of this study was to develop novel
antibiotics against H. pylori, and we thus targeted H. pylori phosphopantetheine 
adenylyltransferase (HpPPAT). PPAT catalyzes the penultimate step in coenzyme A
biosynthesis. Its inactivation effectively prevents bacterial viability, making
it an attractive target for antibacterial drug discovery. We employed virtual
high-throughput screening and the HpPPAT crystal structure to identify compounds 
in the PubChem database that might act as inhibitors of HpPPAT. d-amethopterin is
a potential inhibitor for blocking HpPPAT activity and suppressing H. pylori
viability. Following treatment with d-amethopterin, H. pylori exhibited
morphological characteristics associated with cell death. d-amethopterin is a
mixed inhibitor of HpPPAT activity; it simultaneously occupies the HpPPAT
4'-phosphopantetheine- and ATP-binding sites. Its binding affinity is in the
micromolar range, implying that it is sufficiently potent to serve as a lead
compound in subsequent drug development. Characterization of the d-amethopterin
and HpPPAT interaction network in a docked model will allow us to initiate
rational drug optimization to improve the inhibitory efficacy of d-amethopterin. 
We anticipate that novel, potent, and selective HpPPAT inhibitors will emerge for
the treatment of H. pylori infection.

PMID: 24040220  [PubMed - in process]


22. PLoS One. 2013 Sep 11;8(9):e74205. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0074205.

Systems-Based Identification of Temporal Processing Pathways during Bone Cell
Mechanotransduction.

Worton LE, Ausk BJ, Downey LM, Bain SD, Gardiner EM, Srinivasan S, Gross TS, Kwon
RY.

Department of Orthopaedics and Sports Medicine, University of Washington,
Seattle, Washington, United States of America.

Bone has long been established to be a highly mechanosensitive tissue. When
subjected to mechanical loading, bone exhibits profoundly different anabolic
responses depending on the temporal pattern in which the stimulus is applied.
This phenomenon has been termed temporal processing, and involves complex signal 
amplification mechanisms that are largely unidentified. In this study, our goal
was to characterize transcriptomic perturbations arising from the insertion of
intermittent rest periods (a temporal variation with profound effects on bone
anabolism) in osteoblastic cells subjected to fluid flow, and assess the utility 
of these perturbations to identify signaling pathways that are differentially
activated by this temporal variation. At the level of the genome, we found that
the common and differential alterations in gene expression arising from the two
flow conditions were distributionally distinct, with the differential alterations
characterized by many small changes in a large number of genes. Using
bioinformatics analysis, we identified distinct up- and down-regulation
transcriptomic signatures associated with the insertion of rest intervals, and
found that the up-regulation signature was significantly associated with MAPK
signaling. Confirming the involvement of the MAPK pathway, we found that the
insertion of rest intervals significantly elevated flow-induced p-ERK1/2 levels
by enabling a second spike in activity that was not observed in response to
continuous flow. Collectively, these studies are the first to characterize
distinct transcriptomic perturbations in bone cells subjected to continuous and
intermittent stimulation, and directly demonstrate the utility of systems-based
transcriptomic analysis to identify novel acute signaling pathways underlying
temporal processing in bone cells.

PMID: 24040202  [PubMed - in process]


23. PLoS One. 2013 Sep 10;8(9):e73985. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0073985.

miR-203 Inhibits Cell Proliferation and Migration of Lung Cancer Cells by
Targeting PKCα.

Wang C, Wang X, Liang H, Wang T, Yan X, Cao M, Wang N, Zhang S, Zen K, Zhang C,
Chen X.

Jiangsu Engineering Research Center for microRNA Biology and Biotechnology, State
Key Laboratory of Pharmaceutical Biotechnology, School of Life Sciences, Nanjing 
University, Nanjing, Jiangsu, China.

PKCα (protein kinase C alpha, PRKCA) is an important protein involved in several 
steps of signaling pathways in lung cancer, and microRNAs (miRNAs) have also been
shown to participate in lung carcinogenesis. However, it is not clear how PKCα
and miRNAs are correlated in the disease. In this report, we aimed to identify
novel miRNAs that target PKCα and to study their biological function. Using
bioinformatics analysis, we predicted one novel candidate, miR-203, and found
differential expression patterns of miR-203 and PKCα in human lung cancer
tissues. Moreover, we experimentally validated miR-203 as a direct regulator of
PKCα. Finally, we demonstrated that the targeting of PKCα by miR-203 played a
critical role in regulating cell proliferation, apoptosis and migration in lung
cancer cells. In summary, this study identifies a novel miRNA that targets PKCα
and illustrates that the downregulation of PKCα by miR-203 modulates biological
processes in lung cancer cells.

PMID: 24040137  [PubMed - in process]


24. PLoS One. 2013 Sep 5;8(9):e73943. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0073943.

Transimulation - protein biosynthesis web service.

Siwiak M, Zielenkiewicz P.

Department of Bioinformatics, Institute of Biochemistry and Biophysics, Polish
Academy of Sciences, Warsaw, Poland.

Although translation is the key step during gene expression, it remains poorly
characterized at the level of individual genes. For this reason, we developed
Transimulation - a web service measuring translational activity of genes in three
model organisms: Escherichia coli, Saccharomyces cerevisiae and Homo sapiens. The
calculations are based on our previous computational model of translation and
experimental data sets. Transimulation quantifies mean translation initiation and
elongation time (expressed in SI units), and the number of proteins produced per 
transcript. It also approximates the number of ribosomes that typically occupy a 
transcript during translation, and simulates their propagation. The simulation of
ribosomes' movement is interactive and allows modifying the coding sequence on
the fly. It also enables uploading any coding sequence and simulating its
translation in one of three model organisms. In such a case, ribosomes propagate 
according to mean codon elongation times of the host organism, which may prove
useful for heterologous expression. Transimulation was used to examine
evolutionary conservation of translational parameters of orthologous genes.
Transimulation may be accessed at http://nexus.ibb.waw.pl/Transimulation
(requires Java version 1.7 or higher). Its manual and source code, distributed
under the GPL-2.0 license, is freely available at the website.

PMID: 24040122  [PubMed - in process]


25. PLoS One. 2013 Sep 10;8(9):e73938. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0073938.

A toxicogenomic approach for the prediction of murine hepatocarcinogenesis using 
ensemble feature selection.

Eichner J, Kossler N, Wrzodek C, Kalkuhl A, Bach Toft D, Ostenfeldt N, Richard V,
Zell A.

Center for Bioinformatics Tuebingen (ZBIT), University of Tuebingen, Tübingen,
Germany.

The current strategy for identifying the carcinogenicity of drugs involves the
2-year bioassay in male and female rats and mice. As this assay is cost-intensive
and time-consuming there is a high interest in developing approaches for the
screening and prioritization of drug candidates in preclinical safety
evaluations. Predictive models based on toxicogenomics investigations after
short-term exposure have shown their potential for assessing the carcinogenic
risk. In this study, we investigated a novel method for the evaluation of
toxicogenomics data based on ensemble feature selection in conjunction with
bootstrapping for the purpose to derive reproducible and characteristic
multi-gene signatures. This method was evaluated on a microarray dataset
containing global gene expression data from liver samples of both male and female
mice. The dataset was generated by the IMI MARCAR consortium and included gene
expression profiles of genotoxic and nongenotoxic hepatocarcinogens obtained
after treatment of CD-1 mice for 3 or 14 days. We developed predictive models
based on gene expression data of both sexes and the models were employed for
predicting the carcinogenic class of diverse compounds. Comparing the
predictivity of our multi-gene signatures against signatures from literature, we 
demonstrated that by incorporating our gene sets as features slightly higher
accuracy is on average achieved by a representative set of state-of-the art
supervised learning methods. The constructed models were also used for the
classification of Cyproterone acetate (CPA), Wy-14643 (WY) and Thioacetamid
(TAA), whose primary mechanism of carcinogenicity is controversially discussed.
Based on the extracted mouse liver gene expression patterns, CPA would be
predicted as a nongenotoxic compound. In contrast, both WY and TAA would be
classified as genotoxic mouse hepatocarcinogens.

PMID: 24040119  [PubMed - in process]


26. PLoS One. 2013 Sep 5;8(9):e73365. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0073365.

Predictive Computational Modeling of the Mucosal Immune Responses during
Helicobacter pylori Infection.

Carbo A, Bassaganya-Riera J, Pedragosa M, Viladomiu M, Marathe M, Eubank S,
Wendelsdorf K, Bisset K, Hoops S, Deng X, Alam M, Kronsteiner B, Mei Y,
Hontecillas R.

Nutritional Immunology and Molecular Medicine Laboratory, Virginia Bioinformatics
Institute, Virginia Tech, Blacksburg, Virginia, United States of America ; Center
for Modeling Immunity to Enteric Pathogens Virginia Bioinformatics Institute,
Virginia Tech, Blacksburg, Virginia, United States of America.

T helper (Th) cells play a major role in the immune response and pathology at the
gastric mucosa during Helicobacter pylori infection. There is a limited
mechanistic understanding regarding the contributions of CD4+ T cell subsets to
gastritis development during H. pylori colonization. We used two computational
approaches: ordinary differential equation (ODE)-based and agent-based modeling
(ABM) to study the mechanisms underlying cellular immune responses to H. pylori
and how CD4+ T cell subsets influenced initiation, progression and outcome of
disease. To calibrate the model, in vivo experimentation was performed by
infecting C57BL/6 mice intragastrically with H. pylori and assaying immune cell
subsets in the stomach and gastric lymph nodes (GLN) on days 0, 7, 14, 30 and 60 
post-infection. Our computational model reproduced the dynamics of effector and
regulatory pathways in the gastric lamina propria (LP) in silico. Simulation
results show the induction of a Th17 response and a dominant Th1 response,
together with a regulatory response characterized by high levels of mucosal Treg)
cells. We also investigated the potential role of peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor γ (PPARγ) activation on the modulation of host
responses to H. pylori by using loss-of-function approaches. Specifically, in
silico results showed a predominance of Th1 and Th17 cells in the stomach of the 
cell-specific PPARγ knockout system when compared to the wild-type simulation.
Spatio-temporal, object-oriented ABM approaches suggested similar dynamics in
induction of host responses showing analogous T cell distributions to ODE
modeling and facilitated tracking lesion formation. In addition, sensitivity
analysis predicted a crucial contribution of Th1 and Th17 effector responses as
mediators of histopathological changes in the gastric mucosa during chronic
stages of infection, which were experimentally validated in mice. These
integrated immunoinformatics approaches characterized the induction of mucosal
effector and regulatory pathways controlled by PPARγ during H. pylori infection
affecting disease outcomes.

PMID: 24039925  [PubMed - in process]


27. PLoS One. 2013 Sep 9;8(9):e73240. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0073240.

Beta Cell 5'-Shifted isomiRs Are Candidate Regulatory Hubs in Type 2 Diabetes.

Baran-Gale J, Fannin EE, Kurtz CL, Sethupathy P.

Department of Genetics, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill,
North Carolina, United States of America ; Curriculum in Bioinformatics and
Computational Biology, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, 
North Carolina, United States of America.

Next-generation deep sequencing of small RNAs has unveiled the complexity of the 
microRNA (miRNA) transcriptome, which is in large part due to the diversity of
miRNA sequence variants ("isomiRs"). Changes to a miRNA's seed sequence
(nucleotides 2-8), including shifted start positions, can redirect targeting to a
dramatically different set of RNAs and alter biological function. We performed
deep sequencing of small RNA from mouse insulinoma (MIN6) cells (widely used as a
surrogate for the study of pancreatic beta cells) and developed a bioinformatic
analysis pipeline to profile isomiR diversity. Additionally, we applied the
pipeline to recently published small RNA-seq data from primary human beta cells
and whole islets and compared the miRNA profiles with that of MIN6. We found
that: (1) the miRNA expression profile in MIN6 cells is highly correlated with
those of primary human beta cells and whole islets; (2) miRNA loci can generate
multiple highly expressed isomiRs with different 5'-start positions (5'-isomiRs);
(3) isomiRs with shifted start positions (5'-shifted isomiRs) are highly
expressed, and can be as abundant as their unshifted counterparts (5'-reference
miRNAs). Finally, we identified 10 beta cell miRNA families as candidate
regulatory hubs in a type 2 diabetes (T2D) gene network. The most significant
candidate hub was miR-29, which we demonstrated regulates the mRNA levels of
several genes critical to beta cell function and implicated in T2D. Three of the 
candidate miRNA hubs were novel 5'-shifted isomiRs: miR-375+1, miR-375-1 and
miR-183-5p+1. We showed by in silico target prediction and in vitro transfection 
studies that both miR-375+1 and miR-375-1 are likely to target an overlapping,
but distinct suite of beta cell genes compared to canonical miR-375. In summary, 
this study characterizes the isomiR profile in beta cells for the first time, and
also highlights the potential functional relevance of 5'-shifted isomiRs to T2D.

PMID: 24039891  [PubMed - in process]


28. PLoS One. 2013 Sep 5;8(9):e73191. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0073191.

Dissection of miRNA-miRNA Interaction in Esophageal Squamous Cell Carcinoma.

Wu B, Li C, Zhang P, Yao Q, Wu J, Han J, Liao L, Xu Y, Lin R, Xiao D, Xu L, Li E,
Li X.

College of Bioinformatics Science and Technology, Harbin Medical University,
Harbin, China ; Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, The Key
Laboratory of Molecular Biology for High Cancer Incidence Coastal Chaoshan Area, 
Shantou University Medical College, Shantou, China.

The relationships between miRNAs and their regulatory influences in esophageal
carcinoma remain largely unknown. Accumulated evidence suggests that delineation 
of subpathways within an entire pathway can underlie complex diseases. To analyze
the regulation of differentially expressed miRNAs in subpathways of esophageal
squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC), we constructed bipartite miRNA and subpathway
networks to determine miRNA regulatory influences on subpathways. The
miRNA-subpathway network indicated that miRNAs regulate numerous subpathways. Two
principal biological networks were derived from the miRNA-subpathway network by
the hypergeometric test. This miRNA-miRNA network revealed the co-regulation of
subpathways between the upregulated and downregulated miRNAs.
Subpathway-subpathway networks characterized scale free, small world, and modular
architecture. K-clique analysis revealed co-regulation of subpathways between
certain downregulated and upregulated miRNAs. When ESCC patients were grouped
according to their expression levels of paired upregulation of miR-31 and
downregulation of miR-338-3p, survival time analysis revealed a significant
difference based on miR-31-miR-338-3p interaction. These findings can facilitate 
the understanding of the biological meaning of miRNA-miRNA interactions with
either the same or opposite expression trend.

PMID: 24039884  [PubMed - in process]


29. PLoS One. 2013 Sep 9;8(9):e72842. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0072842.

Global Features of Gene Expression on the Proteome and Transcriptome Levels in S.
coelicolor during Germination.

Strakova E, Bobek J, Zikova A, Vohradsky J.

Laboratory of Bioinformatics, Institute of Microbiology, Academy of Sciences of
the Czech Republic, Prague, Czech Republic.

Streptomycetes have been studied mostly as producers of secondary metabolites,
while the transition from dormant spores to an exponentially growing culture has 
largely been ignored. Here, we focus on a comparative analysis of fluorescently
and radioactively labeled proteome and microarray acquired transcriptome
expressed during the germination of Streptomyces coelicolor. The time-dynamics is
considered, starting from dormant spores through 5.5 hours of growth with 13 time
points. Time series of the gene expressions were analyzed using correlation,
principal components analysis and an analysis of coding genes utilization.
Principal component analysis was used to identify principal kinetic trends in
gene expression and the corresponding genes driving S. coelicolor germination. In
contrast with the correlation analysis, global trends in the gene/protein
expression reflected by the first principal components showed that the prominent 
patterns in both the protein and the mRNA domains are surprisingly well
correlated. Analysis of the number of expressed genes identified functional
groups activated during different time intervals of the germination.

PMID: 24039809  [PubMed - in process]


30. PLoS One. 2013 Sep 5;8(9):e72423. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0072423.

Association of Two Variants in SMAD7 with the Risk of Congenital Heart Disease in
the Han Chinese Population.

Wang E, Jin W, Duan W, Qiao B, Sun S, Huang G, Shi K, Jin L, Wang H.

Chinese Academy of Sciences and Max Planck Society (CAS-MPG) Partner Institute
for Computational Biology, Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese
Academy of Sciences, Shanghai, China ; The State Key Laboratory of Genetic
Engineering and Ministry of Education (MOE) Key Laboratory of Contemporary
Anthropology, School of Life Sciences, Fudan University, Shanghai, China.

SMAD7 is a general antagonist of TGF-β signaling and has been found to be
involved in cardiogenesis in mouse models, but its role in human congenital heart
disease (CHD) has yet to be investigated. To examine if SMAD7 is associated with 
CHD, we conducted a case-control study in the Han Chinese population. Exon1 and
exon4 of SMAD7, which encode the functional MH1 and MH2 domains, were directly
sequenced in 1,201 sporadic CHD patients and 1,116 control individuals. A total
of 18 sequence variations were identified. Two common variants rs3809922 and
rs3809923 are located at exon4 of SMAD7, and were found in strong linkage
disequilibrium with each other (r (2) = 0.93). We analyzed the association of
these two loci with CHD in 3 independent subgroup case-control studies, and found
that in some subgroups, rs3809922 and rs3809923 were significantly associated
with CHD through genetic model analysis. In the combined data set, TT genotype in
rs3809922 significantly increased the risk of CHD compared with CC and CT, while 
GG genotype in rs3809923 significantly increased the risk of CHD compared with CC
and CG, particularly in the recessive model. In addition, haplotype analyses
showed that haplotype TG significantly increased the risk of CHD
(P = 6.9×10(-6)); this finding supports the results from the analyses based on
single locus. According to data from the 1000 Genomes Project, the frequencies of
the two risk alleles varied greatly between populations worldwide, which indicate
the identified associations might have a population difference. To our knowledge,
this is the first report that genetic variants in SMAD7 influence susceptibility 
to CHD risk.

PMID: 24039762  [PubMed - in process]


31. PLoS One. 2013 Sep 5;8(9):e72366. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0072366.

C-element: A New Clustering Algorithm to Find High Quality Functional Modules in 
PPI Networks.

Ghasemi M, Rahgozar M, Bidkhori G, Masoudi-Nejad A.

Laboratory of Systems Biology and Bioinformatics (LBB), Institute of Biochemistry
and Biophysics, University of Tehran, Tehran, Iran ; Database Research Group
(DBRG), Control and Intelligent Processing Center of Excellence (CIPCE), School
of Electrical and Computer Engineering, College of Engineering, University of
Tehran, Tehran, Iran.

Graph clustering algorithms are widely used in the analysis of biological
networks. Extracting functional modules in protein-protein interaction (PPI)
networks is one such use. Most clustering algorithms whose focuses are on finding
functional modules try either to find a clique like sub networks or to grow
clusters starting from vertices with high degrees as seeds. These algorithms do
not make any difference between a biological network and any other networks. In
the current research, we present a new procedure to find functional modules in
PPI networks. Our main idea is to model a biological concept and to use this
concept for finding good functional modules in PPI networks. In order to evaluate
the quality of the obtained clusters, we compared the results of our algorithm
with those of some other widely used clustering algorithms on three high
throughput PPI networks from Sacchromyces Cerevisiae, Homo sapiens and
Caenorhabditis elegans as well as on some tissue specific networks. Gene Ontology
(GO) analyses were used to compare the results of different algorithms. Each
algorithm's result was then compared with GO-term derived functional modules. We 
also analyzed the effect of using tissue specific networks on the quality of the 
obtained clusters. The experimental results indicate that the new algorithm
outperforms most of the others, and this improvement is more significant when
tissue specific networks are used.

PMID: 24039752  [PubMed - in process]


32. PLoS One. 2013 Sep 9;8(9):e69724. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0069724.

Simulating an Infection Growth Model in Certain Healthy Metabolic Pathways of
Homo sapiens for Highlighting Their Role in Type I Diabetes mellitus Using
Fire-Spread Strategy, Feedbacks and Sensitivities.

Tagore S, De RK.

Department of Biotechnology and Bioinformatics, Padmashree Dr. D. Y. Patil
University, Navi Mumbai, India.

Disease Systems Biology is an area of life sciences, which is not very well
understood to date. Analyzing infections and their spread in healthy metabolite
networks can be one of the focussed areas in this regard. We have proposed a
theory based on the classical forest fire model for analyzing the path of
infection spread in healthy metabolic pathways. The theory suggests that when
fire erupts in a forest, it spreads, and the surrounding trees also catch fire.
Similarly, when we consider a metabolic network, the infection caused in the
metabolites of the network spreads like a fire. We have constructed a simulation 
model which is used to study the infection caused in the metabolic networks from 
the start of infection, to spread and ultimately combating it. For
implementation, we have used two approaches, first, based on quantitative
strategies using ordinary differential equations and second, using graph-theory
based properties. Furthermore, we are using certain probabilistic scores to
complete this task and for interpreting the harm caused in the network, given by 
a 'critical value' to check whether the infection can be cured or not. We have
tested our simulation model on metabolic pathways involved in Type I Diabetes
mellitus in Homo sapiens. For validating our results biologically, we have used
sensitivity analysis, both local and global, as well as for identifying the role 
of feedbacks in spreading infection in metabolic pathways. Moreover, information 
in literature has also been used to validate the results. The metabolic network
datasets have been collected from the Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes
(KEGG).

PMID: 24039701  [PubMed - in process]


33. Per Med. 2013 Jul 1;10(5):453-462.

Personalized medicine: challenges and opportunities for translational
bioinformatics.

Overby CL, Tarczy-Hornoch P.

Program in Personalized &amp; Genomic Medicine and Department of Medicine, University
of Maryland School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA.

Personalized medicine can be defined broadly as a model of healthcare that is
predictive, personalized, preventive and participatory. Two US President's
Council of Advisors on Science and Technology reports illustrate challenges in
personalized medicine (in a 2008 report) and in use of health information
technology (in a 2010 report). Translational bioinformatics is a field that can
help address these challenges and is defined by the American Medical Informatics 
Association as "the development of storage, analytic and interpretive methods to 
optimize the transformation of increasing voluminous biomedical data into
proactive, predictive, preventative and participatory health." This article
discusses barriers to implementing genomics applications and current progress
toward overcoming barriers, describes lessons learned from early experiences of
institutions engaged in personalized medicine and provides example areas for
translational bioinformatics research inquiry.

PMID: 24039624  [PubMed]


34. PLoS Comput Biol. 2013 Sep;9(9):e1003168. doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1003168. Epub
2013 Sep 5.

Finding Associations among Histone Modifications Using Sparse Partial Correlation
Networks.

Lasserre J, Chung HR, Vingron M.

Computational Molecular Biology, MPI for Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany.

Histone modifications are known to play an important role in the regulation of
transcription. While individual modifications have received much attention in
genome-wide analyses, little is known about their relationships. Some authors
have built Bayesian networks of modifications, however most often they have used 
discretized data, and relied on unrealistic assumptions such as the absence of
feedback mechanisms or hidden confounding factors. Here, we propose to infer
undirected networks based on partial correlations between histone modifications. 
Within the partial correlation framework, correlations among two variables are
controlled for associations induced by the other variables. Partial correlation
networks thus focus on direct associations of histone modifications. We apply
this methodology to data in CD4+ cells. The resulting network is well supported
by common knowledge. When pairs of modifications show a large difference between 
their correlation and their partial correlation, a potential confounding factor
is identified and provided as explanation. Data from different cell types (IMR90,
H1) is also exploited in the analysis to assess the stability of the networks.
The results are remarkably similar across cell types. Based on this observation, 
the networks from the three cell types are integrated into a consensus network to
increase robustness. The data and the results discussed in the manuscript can be 
found, together with code, on http://spcn.molgen.mpg.de/index.html.

PMID: 24039558  [PubMed - in process]


35. Int j numer method biomed eng. 2013 Aug 30. doi: 10.1002/cnm.2584. [Epub ahead of
print]

Mathematical modeling of postmenopausal osteoporosis and its treatment by the
anti-catabolic drug denosumab.

Scheiner S, Pivonka P, Smith DW, Dunstan CR, Hellmich C.

Institute for Mechanics of Materials and Structures, Vienna University of
Technology, Austria.

Denosumab, a fully human monoclonal antibody, has been approved for the treatment
of postmenopausal osteoporosis. The therapeutic effect of denosumab rests on its 
ability to inhibit osteoclast differentiation. Here, we present a computational
approach on the basis of coupling a pharmacokinetics model of denosumab with a
pharmacodynamics model for quantifying the effect of denosumab on bone
remodeling. The pharmacodynamics model comprises an integrated systems
biology-continuum micromechanics approach, including a bone cell population
model, considering the governing biochemical factors of bone remodeling
(including the action of denosumab), and a multiscale micromechanics-based bone
mechanics model, for implementing the mechanobiology of bone remodeling in our
model. Numerical studies of postmenopausal osteoporosis show that denosumab
suppresses osteoclast differentiation, thus strongly curtailing bone resorption. 
Simulation results also suggest that denosumab may trigger a short-term bone
volume gain, which is, however, followed by constant or decreasing bone volume.
This evolution is accompanied by a dramatic decrease of the bone turnover rate by
more than one order of magnitude. The latter proposes dominant occurrence of
secondary mineralization (which is not anymore impeded through cellular
activity), leading to higher mineral concentration per bone volume. This explains
the overall higher bone mineral density observed in denosumab-related clinical
studies. Copyright © 2013 John Wiley &amp; Sons, Ltd.

Copyright © 2013 John Wiley &amp; Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 24039120  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


36. Proteomics. 2013 Sep 14. doi: 10.1002/pmic.201200426. [Epub ahead of print]

Classification of fish samples via an integrated proteomics and bioinformatics
approach.

Bellgard M, Taplin R, Chapman B, Livk A, Wellington C, Hunter A, Lipscombe R.

Centre for Comparative Genomics, Murdoch University, Western Australia, 6150.

There is increasing demand to develop cost effective and accurate approaches to
analysing biological tissue samples. This is especially relevant in the fishing
industry where closely related fish samples can be mislabelled, and the high
market value of certain fish leads to the use of alternative species as
substitutes. For example Barramundi and Nile Perch (belonging to the same genus, 
Lates). There is a need to combine selective proteomic data sets with
sophisticated computational analysis to devise a robust classification approach. 
This paper describes an integrated mass spectrometry based proteomics and
bioinformatics approach to classifying a range of fish samples. A classifier is
developed using training data that successfully discriminates between Barramundi 
and Nile Perch samples using a selected protein subset of the proteome.
Additionally, the classifier is shown to successfully discriminate between test
samples not used to develop the classifier, including samples that have been
cooked, and to classify other fish species as neither Barramundi nor Nile Perch. 
This approach has applications to truth in labelling for fishmongers and
restaurants, monitoring fish catches, and for scientific research into distances 
between species. This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24038899  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


37. Angew Chem Int Ed Engl. 2013 Aug 22. doi: 10.1002/anie.201305595. [Epub ahead of 
print]

Biosynthesis of the Antimetabolite 6-Thioguanine in Erwinia amylovora Plays a Key
Role in Fire Blight Pathogenesis.

Coyne S, Chizzali C, Khalil MN, Litomska A, Richter K, Beerhues L, Hertweck C.

Dept. of Biomolecular Chemistry, Leibniz Institute for Natural Product Research
and Infection Biology, HKI, Beutenbergstrasse 11a, 07745 Jena (Germany)
http://www.hki-jena.de.

Sulfur for fire: The molecular basis for the biosynthesis of the antimetabolite
6-thioguanine (6TG) was unveiled in Erwinia amylovora, the causative agent of
fire blight. Bioinformatics, heterologous pathway reconstitution in E. coli, and 
mutational analyses indicate that the protein YcfA mediates guanine thionation in
analogy to 2-thiouridylase. Assays in planta and in cell cultures reveal for the 
first time a crucial role of 6TG in fire blight pathogenesis.

Copyright © 2013 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH &amp; Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 24038828  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


38. Nucleic Acids Res. 2013 Sep 13. [Epub ahead of print]

Long non-coding RNA identification over mouse brain development by integrative
modeling of chromatin and genomic features.

Lv J, Liu H, Huang Z, Su J, He H, Xiu Y, Zhang Y, Wu Q.

School of Life Science and Technology, State Key Laboratory of Urban Water
Resource and Environment, Harbin Institute of Technology, Harbin 150001, China
and College of Bioinformatics Science and Technology, Harbin Medical University, 
Harbin 150081, China.

In silico prediction of genomic long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs) is prerequisite to
the construction and elucidation of non-coding regulatory network. Chromatin
modifications marked by chromatin regulators are important epigenetic features,
which can be captured by prevailing high-throughput approaches such as ChIP
sequencing. We demonstrate that the accuracy of lncRNA predictions can be greatly
improved when incorporating high-throughput chromatin modifications over mouse
embryonic stem differentiation toward adult Cerebellum by logistic regression
with LASSO regularization. The discriminating features include H3K9me3, H3K27ac, 
H3K4me1, open reading frames and several repeat elements. Importantly, chromatin 
information is suggested to be complementary to genomic sequence information,
highlighting the importance of an integrated model. Applying integrated model, we
obtain a list of putative lncRNAs based on uncharacterized fragments from
transcriptome assembly. We demonstrate that the putative lncRNAs have regulatory 
roles in vicinity of known gene loci by expression and Gene Ontology enrichment
analysis. We also show that the lncRNA expression specificity can be efficiently 
modeled by the chromatin data with same developmental stage. The study not only
supports the biological hypothesis that chromatin can regulate expression of
tissue-specific or developmental stage-specific lncRNAs but also reveals the
discriminating features between lncRNA and coding genes, which would guide
further lncRNA identifications and characterizations.

PMID: 24038472  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


39. J Cell Biochem. 2013 Sep 5. doi: 10.1002/jcb.24665. [Epub ahead of print]

MiR-495 enhances the sensitivity of non-small cell lung cancer cells to platinum 
by modulation of copper-transporting P-type adenosine triphosphatase A (ATP7A).

Song L, Li Y, Li W, Wu S, Li Z.

Department of Respiratory Medicine, Xijing Hospital, Fourth Military Medical
University, Xi'an, 710032, China.

Copper-transporting P-type adenosine triphosphatase A (ATP7A) is associated with 
platinum drug resistance in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). MicroRNAs
(miRNAs) are a class of small non-coding RNA molecules that regulate gene
expression at post-transcriptional level. In this study, the aim is to explore
which miRNAs might participate in the platinum resistance by targeting ATP7A in
NSCLC. Using real time PCR-based miRNA expression profiling and bioinformatics,
we selected miR-495 as a candidate miRNA. EGFP reporter assay, real time PCR and 
western blot validated that ATP7A was a direct target for miR-495. The drug
sensitivity assay indicated that miR-495 enhanced the cell response to cisplatin 
(CDDP) in NSCLC cells, while inhibition of miR-495 led to the opposite effects.
Importantly, either overexpression or knockdown of ATP7A could override the
effect of miR-495 on chemosensitivity. We also demonstrated that miR-495
increased the intracellular CDDP accumulation and overexpression of ATP7A can
reduce the increased drug concentration induced by miR-495. Finally, we
discovered that there was a converse relationship between miR-495 and ATP7A
levels in NSCLC tissues sensitive or resistant to CDDP. In conclusion, our data
demonstrate that miR-495 regulates the multi-drug resistance by modulation of
ATP7A expression in NSCLC and suggest that miR-495 may serve as a potential
biomarker for the treatment of multi-drug resistant NSCLC patients with high
ATP7A levels. J. Cell. Biochem. © 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

© 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 24038379  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


40. Nucleic Acids Res. 2013 Sep 12. [Epub ahead of print]

Histone posttranslational modifications and cell fate determination: lens
induction requires the lysine acetyltransferases CBP and p300.

Wolf L, Harrison W, Huang J, Xie Q, Xiao N, Sun J, Kong L, Lachke SA, Kuracha MR,
Govindarajan V, Brindle PK, Ashery-Padan R, Beebe DC, Overbeek PA, Cvekl A.

Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences, Albert Einstein College of
Medicine, Bronx, NY10461, USA, Department of Genetics, Albert Einstein College of
Medicine, Bronx, NY10461, USA, Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology,
Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX 77030, USA, Departments of Ophthalmology 
and Visual Sciences, Washington University Saint Louis, Saint Louis, MO 63110,
USA, Department of Biological Sciences, University of Delaware, Newark, DE 19716,
USA, Center for Bioinformatics and Computational Biology, University of Delaware,
Newark, DE 19716, USA, Department of Surgery, Creighton University, Omaha, NE
68178, USA, Department of Biochemistry, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital,
Memphis, TN 38105, USA and Department of Human Molecular Genetics and
Biochemistry, Sackler School of Medicine and Sagol School of Neuroscience, Tel
Aviv University, Israel 69978.

Lens induction is a classical embryologic model to study cell fate determination.
It has been proposed earlier that specific changes in core histone modifications 
accompany the process of cell fate specification and determination. The lysine
acetyltransferases CBP and p300 function as principal enzymes that modify core
histones to facilitate specific gene expression. Herein, we performed conditional
inactivation of both CBP and p300 in the ectodermal cells that give rise to the
lens placode. Inactivation of both CBP and p300 resulted in the dramatic
discontinuation of all aspects of lens specification and organogenesis, resulting
in aphakia. The CBP/p300(-/-) ectodermal cells are viable and not prone to
apoptosis. These cells showed reduced expression of Six3 and Sox2, while
expression of Pax6 was not upregulated, indicating discontinuation of lens
induction. Consequently, expression of αB- and αA-crystallins was not initiated. 
Mutant ectoderm exhibited markedly reduced levels of histone H3 K18 and K27
acetylation, subtly increased H3 K27me3 and unaltered overall levels of H3 K9ac
and H3 K4me3. Our data demonstrate that CBP and p300 are required to establish
lens cell-type identity during lens induction, and suggest that posttranslational
histone modifications are integral to normal cell fate determination in the
mammalian lens.

PMID: 24038357  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


41. Adv Nutr. 2013 Sep 1;4(5):579-84. doi: 10.3945/an.113.004176.

Nutrition research to affect food and a healthy lifespan.

Ohlhorst SD, Russell R, Bier D, Klurfeld DM, Li Z, Mein JR, Milner J, Ross AC,
Stover P, Konopka E.

American Society for Nutrition, Bethesda, MD.

Proper nutrition offers one of the most effective and least costly ways to
decrease the burden of many diseases and their associated risk factors, including
obesity. Nutrition research holds the key to increasing our understanding of the 
causes of obesity and its related comorbidities and thus holds promise to
markedly influence global health and economies. After outreach to 75 thought
leaders, the American Society for Nutrition (ASN) convened a Working Group to
identify the nutrition research needs whose advancement will have the greatest
projected impact on the future health and well-being of global populations. ASN's
Nutrition Research Needs focus on the following high priority areas: 1)
variability in individual responses to diet and foods; 2) healthy growth,
development, and reproduction; 3) health maintenance; 4) medical management; 5)
nutrition-related behaviors; and 6) food supply/environment. ASN hopes the
Nutrition Research Needs will prompt collaboration among scientists across all
disciplines to advance this challenging research agenda given the high potential 
for translation and impact on public health. Furthermore, ASN hopes the findings 
from the Nutrition Research Needs will stimulate the development and adoption of 
new and innovative strategies that can be applied toward the prevention and
treatment of nutrition-related diseases. The multidisciplinary nature of
nutrition research requires stakeholders with differing areas of expertise to
collaborate on multifaceted approaches to establish the evidence-based nutrition 
guidance and policies that will lead to better health for the global population. 
In addition to the identified research needs, ASN also identified 5 tools that
are critical to the advancement of the Nutrition Research Needs: 1) omics, 2)
bioinformatics, 3) databases, 4) biomarkers, and 5) cost-effectiveness analysis.

PMID: 24038264  [PubMed - in process]


42. J Cell Biochem. 2013 Aug 22. doi: 10.1002/jcb.24655. [Epub ahead of print]

miR-34c enhances mouse spermatogonial stem cells differentiation by targeting
Nanos2.

Yu M, Mu H, Niu Z, Chu Z, Zhu H, Hua J.

College of Veterinary Medicine, Shaanxi Centre of Stem Cells Engineering &amp;
Technology, Key Lab for Animal Biotechnology of Agriculture Ministry, Northwest
A&amp;F University, Yangling, Shaanxi, 712100, China.

MiRNAs are expressed in many mammalian cells, acting specific roles in regulating
gene expression or mediating special mRNAs cleavage by targeting their 3'UTR.
Some miRNAs are essential and important for animal development. However, it is
still unclear what the relationship is between miR-34c and mammalian
spermatogonial stem cells (SSCs). We found that a conserved microRNA-34c through 
its target-Nanos2, regulating SSCs' differentiation in mouse.
Immunohistochemistry analysis of Nanos2 and miR-34c FISH results revealed the
opposite expression trends between them. Seven bioinformatics websites and
programs predicted that miR-34c has interaction sites in Nanos2's 3' untranslated
region (3'UTR). Dual-luciferase reporter vector and mutated dual-luciferase
reporter vector analysis validated that they are interacted. After transfection
miR-34c mimics into mouse SSCs, or miR-34c lentiviral vector in vitro
co-cultivation with seminiferous tubules, and western blot analysis demonstrated 
that miR-34c over-expression could suppress Nanos2 expression in
post-transcription level. Our experiments identified that miR-34c may promote
meiosis process by interacting with Nanos2 leading up-regulation of Stra8 in
mouse spermatogonial stem cells. J. Cell. Biochem. © 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

© 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 24038201  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


43. J Med Virol. 2013 Sep 13. doi: 10.1002/jmv.23749. [Epub ahead of print]

Serology indicates cytomegalovirus infection is associated with varicella-zoster 
virus reactivation.

Ogunjimi B, Theeten H, Hens N, Beutels P.

Centre for Health Economics Research and Modeling Infectious Diseases, Vaccine &amp; 
Infectious Disease Institute, University of Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium;
Interuniversity Institute for Biostatistics and Statistical Bioinformatics,
Hasselt University, Hasselt, Belgium.

Varicella-zoster virus (VZV) causes chickenpox after which the virus remains
latent in neural ganglia. Subsequent reactivation episodes occur, leading mainly 
to subclinical detection of VZV, but also to the clinical entity herpes zoster.
These reactivations are known to occur most frequently amongst immunocompromised 
individuals, but the incidence of herpes zoster is also known to increase with
age, supposedly as a consequence of immunosenescence. Our analysis aims to
explore associations between cytomegalovirus (CMV) infection and VZV reactivation
by analyzing VZV-specific antibody titers as a function of age, gender, and CMV
serostatus. The analysis was repeated on measles and parvovirus B19 antibody
titers. At the time of the observations, measles virus circulation was virtually 
eliminated, whereas parvovirus B19 circulated at lower levels than VZV. Multiple 
linear regression analyses, using the log-transformed antibody titers, identified
a positive association between ageing and VZV antibody titers suggesting that
ageing increasingly stimulates VZV reactivation. CMV infection further amplified 
the positive association between ageing and the reactivation rate. A negative
association between CMV infection and VZV antibody titers was found in young
individuals, thereby supporting the hypothesis that CMV infection may have a
negative effect on the number of B-cells. However, no associations between CMV
infection and measles or parvovirus B19 antibody titers occurred, but ageing
tended to be associated with a decrease in the antibody titer against parvovirus 
B19. The combined results thus suggest that both CMV-dependent and
CMV-independent immunosenescence occurs. This is supported by an in-depth
analysis of VZV, measles and parvovirus B19 antibody titers. J. Med. Virol.
9999:XX-XX, 2013. © 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

© 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 24037981  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


44. Mol Biol Evol. 2013 Sep 12. [Epub ahead of print]

Protein expansion is primarily due to indels in intrinsically disordered regions.

Light S, Sagit R, Sachenkova O, Ekman D, Elofsson A.

*Science for Life Laboratory, Bioinformatics Infrastructure for Life Sciences,
Department ofBiochemistry and Biophysics, Stockholm University, SE-171 21 Solna, 
Sweden, Contributed equallyE-mail:sara.light@scilifelab.se.

Proteins evolve not only through point mutations but also by insertion and
deletion events, which affect the length of the protein. It is well known that
such indel events most frequently occur in surface-exposed loops. However,
detailed analysis of indel events in distantly related and fast evolving proteins
is hampered by the difficulty involved in correctly aligning such sequences.
Here, we circumvent this problem by first only analyzing homologous proteins
based on length variation rather than pairwise alignments. Using this approach we
find a surprisingly strong relationship between difference in length and
difference in the number of intrinsically disordered residues, where up to three 
quarters of the length variation can be explained by changes in the number of
intrinsically disordered residues. Further, we find that disorder is common in
both insertions and deletions. A more detailed analysis reveals that indel events
do not induce disorder but rather that already disordered regions accrue indels, 
suggesting that there is a lowered selective pressure for indels to occur within 
intrinsically disordered regions.

PMID: 24037790  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


45. Cancer. 2013 Aug 20. doi: 10.1002/cncr.28304. [Epub ahead of print]

Integration of cancer genomics with treatment selection: From the genome to
predictive biomarkers.

Ow TJ, Sandulache VC, Skinner HD, Myers JN.

Department of Otorhinolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Montefiore Medical
Center/Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, New York; Department of
Pathology, Montefiore Medical Center/Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, 
New York.

The field of cancer genomics is rapidly advancing as new technology provides
detailed genetic and epigenetic profiling of human cancers. The amount of new
data available describing the genetic make-up of tumors is paralleled by rapid
advances in drug discovery and molecular therapy currently under investigation to
treat these diseases. This review summarizes the challenges and approaches
associated with the integration of genomic data into the development of new
biomarkers in the management of cancer. Cancer 2013. © 2013 American Cancer
Society.

© 2013 American Cancer Society.

PMID: 24037788  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


46. J Comput Chem. 2013 Aug 26. doi: 10.1002/jcc.23418. [Epub ahead of print]

Computational protein design: The proteus software and selected applications.

Simonson T, Gaillard T, Mignon D, Schmidt Am Busch M, Lopes A, Amara N,
Polydorides S, Sedano A, Druart K, Archontis G.

Laboratoire de Biochimie (CNRS UMR7654), Department of Biology, Ecole
Polytechnique, Palaiseau, 91128, France.

We describe an automated procedure for protein design, implemented in a flexible 
software package, called Proteus. System setup and calculation of an energy
matrix are done with the XPLOR modeling program and its sophisticated command
language, supporting several force fields and solvent models. A second program
provides algorithms to search sequence space. It allows a decomposition of the
system into groups, which can be combined in different ways in the energy
function, for both positive and negative design. The whole procedure can be
controlled by editing 2-4 scripts. Two applications consider the tyrosyl-tRNA
synthetase enzyme and its successful redesign to bind both O-methyl-tyrosine and 
D-tyrosine. For the latter, we present Monte Carlo simulations where the
D-tyrosine concentration is gradually increased, displacing L-tyrosine from the
binding pocket and yielding the binding free energy difference, in good agreement
with experiment. Complete redesign of the Crk SH3 domain is presented. The top
10000 sequences are all assigned to the correct fold by the SUPERFAMILY library
of Hidden Markov Models. Finally, we report the acid/base behavior of the SNase
protein. Sidechain protonation is treated as a form of mutation; it is then
straightforward to perform constant-pH Monte Carlo simulations, which yield good 
agreement with experiment. Overall, the software can be used for a wide range of 
application, producing not only native-like sequences but also thermodynamic
properties with errors that appear comparable to other current software
packages.Copyright © 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

Copyright © 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 24037756  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


47. Biomol NMR Assign. 2013 Sep 14. [Epub ahead of print]

(1)H, (13)C and (15)N resonance assignments of the VWA domain of Saccharomyces
cerevisiae Rpn10, a regulatory subunit of 26S proteasome.

Wu Y, Hu Y, Jin C.

Beijing Nuclear Magnetic Resonance Center, Peking University, Beijing, 100871,
China.

Rpn10 is a ubiquitin receptor of the 26S proteasome, and plays an important role 
in poly-ubiquitinated proteins recognition in the ubiquitin-proteasome protein
degradation pathway. It is located in the 19S regulatory particle and interacts
with several subunits of both lid and base complexes. Bioinformatics analysis of 
yeast Rpn10 suggests that it contains a von Willebrand (VWA domain) and a
C-terminal tail containing a Ub-interacting motif. Studies of Saccharomyces
cerevisiae Rpn10 suggested that its VWA domain might participate in interactions 
with subunit from both lid and base subcomplexes of the 19S regulatory particle. 
Herein, we report the chemical shift assignments of (1)H, (13)C and (15)N atoms
of the VWA domain of S. cerevisiae Rpn10, which provide the basis for further
structural and functional studies of Rpn10 by solution NMR technique.

PMID: 24037519  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


48. Nat Biotechnol. 2013 Sep 15. doi: 10.1038/nbt.2702. [Epub ahead of print]

Reproducibility of high-throughput mRNA and small RNA sequencing across
laboratories.

't Hoen PA, Friedländer MR, Almlöf J, Sammeth M, Pulyakhina I, Anvar SY, Laros
JF, Buermans HP, Karlberg O, Brännvall M; The GEUVADIS Consortium, van Ommen GJ, 
Estivill X, Guigó R, Syvänen AC, Gut IG, Dermitzakis ET, Antonorakis SE, Brazma
A, Flicek P, Schreiber S, Rosenstiel P, Meitinger T, Strom TM, Lehrach H, Sudbrak
R, Carracedo A, 't Hoen PA, Pulyakhina I, Anvar SY, Laros JF, Buermans HP, van
Iterson M, Friedländer MR, Monlong J, Lizano E, Bertier G, Ferreira PG, Sammeth
M, Almlöf J, Karlberg O, Brännvall M, Ribeca P, Griebel T, Beltran S, Gut M,
Kahlem K, Lappalainen T, Giger T, Ongen H, Padioleau I, Kilpinen H,
Gonzàlez-Porta M, Kurbatova N, Tikhonov A, Greger L, Barann M, Esser D, Häsler R,
Wieland T, Schwarzmayr T, Sultan M, Amstislavskiy V, den Dunnen JT, van Ommen GJ,
Gut IG, Guigó R, Estivill X, Syvänen AC, Dermitzakis ET, Lappalainen T.

1] Department of Human Genetics, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The
Netherlands. [2] Netherlands Bioinformatics Centre, Leiden, The Netherlands.

RNA sequencing is an increasingly popular technology for genome-wide analysis of 
transcript sequence and abundance. However, understanding of the sources of
technical and interlaboratory variation is still limited. To address this, the
GEUVADIS consortium sequenced mRNAs and small RNAs of lymphoblastoid cell lines
of 465 individuals in seven sequencing centers, with a large number of
replicates. The variation between laboratories appeared to be considerably
smaller than the already limited biological variation. Laboratory effects were
mainly seen in differences in insert size and GC content and could be adequately 
corrected for. In small-RNA sequencing, the microRNA (miRNA) content differed
widely between samples owing to competitive sequencing of rRNA fragments. This
did not affect relative quantification of miRNAs. We conclude that distributing
RNA sequencing among different laboratories is feasible, given proper
standardization and randomization procedures. We provide a set of quality
measures and guidelines for assessing technical biases in RNA-seq data.

PMID: 24037425  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


49. Nature. 2013 Sep 15. doi: 10.1038/nature12531. [Epub ahead of print]

Transcriptome and genome sequencing uncovers functional variation in humans.

Lappalainen T, Sammeth M, Friedländer MR, 't Hoen PA, Monlong J, Rivas MA,
Gonzàlez-Porta M, Kurbatova N, Griebel T, Ferreira PG, Barann M, Wieland T,
Greger L, van Iterson M, Almlöf J, Ribeca P, Pulyakhina I, Esser D, Giger T,
Tikhonov A, Sultan M, Bertier G, Macarthur DG, Lek M, Lizano E, Buermans HP,
Padioleau I, Schwarzmayr T, Karlberg O, Ongen H, Kilpinen H, Beltran S, Gut M,
Kahlem K, Amstislavskiy V, Stegle O, Pirinen M, Montgomery SB, Donnelly P,
McCarthy MI, Flicek P, Strom TM, The Geuvadis Consortium, Lehrach H, Schreiber S,
Sudbrak R, Carracedo A, Antonarakis SE, Häsler R, Syvänen AC, van Ommen GJ,
Brazma A, Meitinger T, Rosenstiel P, Guigó R, Gut IG, Estivill X, Dermitzakis ET.

1] Department of Genetic Medicine and Development, University of Geneva Medical
School, 1211 Geneva, Switzerland [2] Institute for Genetics and Genomics in
Geneva (iG3), University of Geneva, 1211 Geneva, Switzerland [3] Swiss Institute 
of Bioinformatics, 1211 Geneva, Switzerland.

Genome sequencing projects are discovering millions of genetic variants in
humans, and interpretation of their functional effects is essential for
understanding the genetic basis of variation in human traits. Here we report
sequencing and deep analysis of messenger RNA and microRNA from lymphoblastoid
cell lines of 462 individuals from the 1000 Genomes Project-the first uniformly
processed high-throughput RNA-sequencing data from multiple human populations
with high-quality genome sequences. We discover extremely widespread genetic
variation affecting the regulation of most genes, with transcript structure and
expression level variation being equally common but genetically largely
independent. Our characterization of causal regulatory variation sheds light on
the cellular mechanisms of regulatory and loss-of-function variation, and allows 
us to infer putative causal variants for dozens of disease-associated loci.
Altogether, this study provides a deep understanding of the cellular mechanisms
of transcriptome variation and of the landscape of functional variants in the
human genome.

PMID: 24037378  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


50. ALTEX. 2013 Sep 14. pii: S1868696X1304241X. [Epub ahead of print]

A computational approach to mechanistic and predictive toxicology of pesticides.

Kongsbak K, Vinggaard AM, Hadrup N, Audouze K.

Center for Biological Sequence Analysis, Department of Systems Biology, Technical
University of Denmark, DK-2800 Kgs. Lyngby, Denmark;

Emerging challenges of managing and interpreting large amounts of complex
biological data have given rise to the growing field of computational biology. We
investigated the applicability of an integrated systems toxicology approach on
five selected pesticides to get an overview of their modes of action in humans,
to group them according to their modes of action, and to hypothesize on their
potential effects on human health. We extracted human proteins associated to
prochloraz, tebuconazole, epoxiconazole, procymidone, and mancozeb and enriched
each protein set by using a high confidence human protein interactome. Then, we
explored modes of action of the chemicals, by integrating protein-disease
information to the resulting protein networks. The dominating human adverse
effects affected were reproductive disorders followed by adrenal diseases. Our
results indicated that prochloraz, tebuconazole, and procymidone exerted their
effects mainly via interference with steroidogenesis and nuclear receptors.
Prochloraz was associated to a large number of human diseases, and together with 
tebuconazole showed several significant associations to Testicular Dysgenesis
Syndrome. Mancozeb showed a differential mode of action, involving inflammatory
processes. This method provides an efficient way of overviewing data and grouping
chemicals according to their mode of action and potential human adverse effects. 
Such information is valuable when dealing with predictions of mixture effects of 
chemicals and may contribute to the development of adverse outcome pathways.

PMID: 24037280  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


51. Nat Methods. 2013 Sep 15. doi: 10.1038/nmeth.2650. [Epub ahead of print]

TCPA: a resource for cancer functional proteomics data.

Li J, Lu Y, Akbani R, Ju Z, Roebuck PL, Liu W, Yang JY, Broom BM, Verhaak RG,
Kane DW, Wakefield C, Weinstein JN, Mills GB, Liang H.

1] Department of Bioinformatics and Computational Biology, The University of
Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas, USA. [2].

PMID: 24037243  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


52. Bioinformatics. 2013 Sep 13. [Epub ahead of print]

Discovering Combinatorial Interactions in Survival Data.

Duverle DA, Takeuchi I, Murakami-Tonami Y, Kadomatsu K, Tsuda K.

Computational Biology Research Center, National Institute of Advanced Industrial 
Science and Technology, Tokyo, Japan.

MOTIVATION: While several methods exist to relate high-dimensional gene
expression data to various clinical phenotypes, finding combinations of features 
in such input remains a challenge, particularly when fitting complex statistical 
models such as those used for survival studies.
RESULTS: Our proposed method builds on existing "regularisation path-following"
techniques to produce regression models that can extract arbitrarily complex
patterns of input features (such as gene combinations) from large-scale data that
relate to a known clinical outcome. Through the use of the data's structure and
itemset mining techniques, we are able to avoid combinatorial complexity issues
typically encountered with such methods and our algorithm performs in similar
orders of duration as single-variable versions. Applied to data from various
clinical studies of cancer patient survival time, our method was able to produce 
a number of promising gene-interaction candidates whose tumour-related roles
appear confirmed by literature.
AVAILABILITY: An R implementation of the algorithm described in this paper can be
found at https://github.com/david-duverle/regularisation-path-following CONTACT: 
dave.duverle@aist.go.jp.

PMID: 24037215  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


53. Bioinformatics. 2013 Sep 12. [Epub ahead of print]

Ontology-aware classification of tissue and cell-type signals in gene expression 
profiles across platforms and technologies.

Lee YS, Krishnan A, Zhu Q, Troyanskaya O.

Department of Computer Science, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ 08544, USA.

MOTIVATION: Leveraging gene expression data through large-scale integrative
analyses for multicellular organisms is challenging because most samples are not 
fully annotated to their tissue/cell-type of origin. A computational method to
classify samples using their entire gene expression profiles is needed. Such a
method must be applicable across thousands of independent studies, hundreds of
gene expression technologies, and hundreds of diverse human tissues and
cell-types.
RESULTS: We present URSA (Unveiling RNA Sample Annotation) that leverages the
complex tissue/cell-type relationships and simultaneously estimates the
probabilities associated to hundreds of tissues/cell-types for any given gene
expression profile. URSA provides accurate and intuitive probability values for
expression profiles across independent studies and outperforms other methods
irrespective of data preprocessing techniques. Moreover, without re-training,
URSA can be used to classify samples from diverse microarray platforms and even
from next generation sequencing technology. Finally, we provide a molecular
interpretation for the tissue and cell-type models as the biological basis for
URSA's classifications.
AVAILABILITY: An interactive web interface for using URSA for gene-expression
analysis is available at: ursa.princeton.edu. The source code is available at
https://bitbucket.org/youngl/ursa_backend.
CONTACT: ogt@cs.princeton.edu SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: Supplementary figures
and table are available online.

PMID: 24037214  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


54. Bioinformatics. 2013 Sep 12. [Epub ahead of print]

Protein Evolution along Phylogenetic Histories under Structurally Constrained
Substitution Models.

Arenas M, Dos Santos HG, Posada D, Bastolla U.

Centre for Molecular Biology "Severo Ochoa", Consejo Superior de Investigaciones 
Científicas (CSIC), Madrid, Spain.

MOTIVATION: Models of molecular evolution aim at describing the evolutionary
processes at the molecular level. However, current models rarely incorporate
information from protein structure. Conversely, structure-based models of protein
evolution have not been commonly applied to simulate sequence evolution in a
phylogenetic framework and they often ignore relevant evolutionary processes such
as recombination. A simulation evolutionary framework that integrates
substitution models that account for protein structure stability should be able
to generate more realistic in silico evolved proteins for a variety of purposes.
RESULTS: We developed a method to simulate protein evolution that combines models
of protein folding stability, such that the fitness depends on the stability of
the native state both with respect to unfolding and misfolding, with phylogenetic
histories that can be either specified by the user or simulated with the
coalescent under complex evolutionary scenarios including recombination,
demographics and migration. We have implemented this framework in a computer
program called ProteinEvolver. Remarkably, comparing these models with empirical 
amino acid replacement models, we found that the former produce amino acid
distributions closer to distributions observed in real protein families, and
proteins that are predicted to be more stable. Therefore, we conclude that
evolutionary models that consider protein stability and realistic evolutionary
histories constitute a better approximation of the real evolutionary process.
AVAILABILITY: ProteinEvolver is written in C, can run in parallel, and is freely 
available from http://code.google.com/p/proteinevolver/.
CONTACT: marenas@cbm.uam.es, ubastolla@cbm.uam.es SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION:
Supplementary data are available at Bioinformatics online.

PMID: 24037213  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


55. Bioinformatics. 2013 Sep 12. [Epub ahead of print]

CruzDB: software for annotation of genomic intervals with UCSC genome-browser
database.

Pedersen BS, Yang IV, De S.

Department of Medicine, University of Colorado Denver, School of Medicine,
Denver, Colorado,USA.

MOTIVATION: The biological significance of genomic features is often
context-dependent. Annotating a particular dataset with existing, external data
can provide insight into function.
RESULTS: We present CruzDB, a fast and intuitive programmatic interface to the
UCSC genome browser that facilitates integrative analyses of diverse local and
remotely hosted datasets. We showcase the syntax of CruzDB using miRNA-binding
sites as examples, and further demonstrate its utility with 3 biological
discoveries. First, DNA replication timing is stratified in gene regions exons
tend to replicate early, and introns late during S phase. Second, several
non-coding variants associated with cognitive functions map to lincRNA
transcripts of relevant function, suggesting potential function of these
regulatory RNAs in neuronal diseases. Third, lamina-associated genomic regions
are highly enriched in olfaction- related genes, indicating a role of nuclear
organization in their regulation.
AVAILABILITY: CruzDB is available at https://github.com/brentp/cruzdb under the
MIT open-source license.
CONTACT: bpederse@gmail.com, subhajyoti.de@ucdenver.edu.

PMID: 24037212  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


56. Database (Oxford). 2013 Sep 14;2013(0):bat061. doi: 10.1093/database/bat061.
Print 2013.

Groups: knowledge spreadsheets for symbolic biocomputing.

Travers M, Paley SM, Shrager J, Holland TA, Karp PD.

Bioinformatics Research Group, SRI International, Menlo Park, CA 94025, USA.

Knowledge spreadsheets (KSs) are a visual tool for interactive data analysis and 
exploration. They differ from traditional spreadsheets in that rather than being 
oriented toward numeric data, they work with symbolic knowledge representation
structures and provide operations that take into account the semantics of the
application domain. 'Groups' is an implementation of KSs within the Pathway Tools
system. Groups allows Pathway Tools users to define a group of objects (e.g.
groups of genes or metabolites) from a Pathway/Genome Database. Groups can be
transformed (e.g. by transforming a metabolite group to the group of pathways in 
which those metabolites are substrates); combined through set operations;
analysed (e.g. through enrichment analysis); and visualized (e.g. by painting
onto a metabolic map diagram). Users of the Pathway Tools-based BioCyc.org
website have made extensive use of Groups, and an informal survey of Groups users
suggests that Groups has achieved the goal of allowing biologists themselves to
perform some data manipulations that previously would have required the
assistance of a programmer. Database URL: BioCyc.org.

PMID: 24037025  [PubMed - in process]


57. Int J Mol Sci. 2013 Sep 12;14(9):18790-808. doi: 10.3390/ijms140918790.

Long Non-Coding RNAs and Complex Human Diseases.

Li J, Xuan Z, Liu C.

Bioinformatics Research Group, Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information
Processing, Advanced Computer Research Center, Institute of Computing Technology,
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190, China. zhenyu.xuan@utdallas.edu.

Long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs) are a heterogeneous class of RNAs that are
generally defined as non-protein-coding transcripts longer than 200 nucleotides. 
Recently, an increasing number of studies have shown that lncRNAs can be involved
in various critical biological processes, such as chromatin remodeling, gene
transcription, and protein transport and trafficking. Moreover, lncRNAs are
dysregulated in a number of complex human diseases, including coronary artery
diseases, autoimmune diseases, neurological disorders, and various cancers, which
indicates their important roles in these diseases. Here, we reviewed the current 
understanding of lncRNAs, including their definition and subclassification,
regulatory functions, and potential roles in different types of complex human
diseases.

PMID: 24036441  [PubMed - in process]


58. Steroids. 2013 Sep 11. pii: S0039-128X(13)00196-7. doi:
10.1016/j.steroids.2013.08.014. [Epub ahead of print]

Speeding up the screening of steroids in urine: development of a user-friendly
library.

Galesio M, López-Fdez H, Reboiro-Jato M, Gómez-Meire S, Glez-Peña D,
Fdez-Riverola F, Lodeiro C, Diniz M, Capelo JL.

REQUIMTE, Departamento de Química, Faculdade de Ciências e Tecnologia,
Universidade Nova de Lisboa, 2829-516 Monte de Caparica, Portugal.

This work presents a novel database search engine - MLibrary - designed to assist
the user in the detection and identification of androgenic anabolic steroids
(AAS) and its metabolites by matrix assisted laser desorption/ionization (MALDI) 
and mass spectrometry-based strategies. The detection of the AAS in the samples
was accomplished by searching (i) the mass spectrometric (MS) spectra against the
library developed to identify possible positives and (ii) by comparison of the
tandem mass spectrometric (MS/MS) spectra produced after fragmentation of the
possible positives with a complete set of spectra that have previously been
assigned to the software. The urinary screening for anabolic agents plays a major
role in anti-doping laboratories as they represent the most abused drug class in 
sports. With the help of the MLibrary software application, the use of MALDI
techniques for doping control is simplified and the time for evaluation and
interpretation of the results is reduced. To do so, the search engine takes as
input several MALDI-TOF-MS and MALDI-TOF-MS/MS spectra. It aids the researcher in
an automatic mode by identifying possible positives in a single MS analysis and
then confirming their presence in tandem MS analysis by comparing the
experimental tandem mass spectrometric data with the database. Furthermore, the
search engine can, potentially, be further expanded to other compounds in
addition to AASs. The applicability of the MLibrary tool is shown through the
analysis of spiked urine samples.

Copyright © 2013. Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMID: 24036418  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


59. J Struct Biol. 2013 Sep 11. pii: S1047-8477(13)00233-5. doi:
10.1016/j.jsb.2013.09.003. [Epub ahead of print]

Maximizing the potential of electron cryomicroscopy data collected using direct
detectors.

Veesler D, Campbell MG, Cheng A, Fu CY, Murez Z, Johnson JE, Potter CS, Carragher
B.

Department of Integrative Structural and Computational Biology, The Scripps
Research Institute, La Jolla, CA 92037; National Resource for Automated Molecular
Microscopy, The Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla, CA 92037.

Single-particle electron cryo-microscopy is undergoing a technical revolution due
to the recent developments of direct detectors. These new recording devices
detect electrons directly (i.e. without conversion into light) and feature
significantly improved detective quantum efficiencies and readout rates as
compared to photographic films or CCDs. We evaluated here the potential of one
such detector (Gatan K2 Summit) to enable the achievement of near-atomic
resolution reconstructions of biological specimens when coupled to a widely used,
mid-range transmission electron microscope (FEI TF20 Twin). Compensating for
beam-induced motion and stage drift provided a 4.4 Å resolution map of Sulfolobus
Turreted Icosahedral Virus (STIV), which we used as a test particle in this
study. Several motion correction and dose fractionation procedures were explored 
and we describe their influence on the resolution of the final reconstruction. We
also compared the quality of this data to that collected with a FEI Titan Krios
microscope equipped with a Falcon I direct detector, which provides a benchmark
for data collected using a high-end electron microscope.

Copyright © 2013. Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMID: 24036281  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


60. J Theor Biol. 2013 Sep 11. pii: S0022-5193(13)00425-6. doi:
10.1016/j.jtbi.2013.09.004. [Epub ahead of print]

On the competitive uptake and transport of ions through differentiated root
tissues.

Foster KJ, Miklavcic SJ.

Phenomics and Bioinformatics Research Centre, School of Information Technology
and Mathematical Sciences, University of South Australia, Mawson Lakes, SA 5095, 
Australia; Australian Centre for Plant Functional Genomics, Hartley Grove,
Urrbrae, SA 5064, Australia.

We simulate the competitive uptake and transport of a mixed salt system in the
differentiated tissues of plant roots. The results are based on a physical model 
that includes both forced diffusion and convection by the transpiration stream.
The influence of the Casparian strip on regulating apoplastic flow, the focus of 
the paper, is modelled by varying ion diffusive permeabilities, hydraulic
reflection coefficients and water permeability for transport across the
endodermis-pericycle interface. We find that reducing diffusive permeabilities
leads to significantly altered ion concentration profiles in the pericycle and
vascular cylinder regions, while increased convective reflectivities affect
predominantly ion concentrations in the cortex and endodermis tissues. The
self-consistent electric field arising from ion separation is a major influence
on predicted ion fluxes and accumulation rates.

© 2013 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24036203  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


61. Gastroenterology. 2013 Sep 11. pii: S0016-5085(13)01284-5. doi:
10.1053/j.gastro.2013.09.006. [Epub ahead of print]

MIR106B and MIR93 Prevent Removal of Bacteria from Epithelial Cells by Disrupting
ATG16L1-Mediated Autophagy.

Lu C, Chen J, Xu HG, Zhou X, He Q, Li YL, Jiang G, Shan Y, Xue B, Zhao RX, Wang
Y, Werle KD, Cui R, Liang J, Xu ZX.

Division of Hematology and Oncology, Comprehensive Cancer Center, the University 
of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, Alabama, USA.

BACKGROUND &amp; AIMS: Variants in genes that regulate autophagy have been associated
with Crohn's disease (CD). Defects in autophagy-mediated removal of pathogenic
microbes could contribute to pathogenesis of CD. We investigated the role of the 
micro-RNAs (miRs) MIR106B and MIR93 in induction of autophagy and bacterial
clearance in human cell lines, and the correlation between MIR106B and
autophagy-related gene 16L1 (ATG16L1) expression in tissues from patients with
CD.
METHODS: We studied the ability of MIR106B and MIR93 to regulate ATG transcripts 
in human cancer cell lines (HCT116, SW480, HeLa , and U2OS) using luciferase
report assays and bioinformatics analyses; MIR106B and MIR93 mimics and
antagonists were transfected into cells to modify levels of miRs. Cells were
infected with LF82, a CD-associated adherent-invasive strain of Escherichia coli,
and monitored by confocal microscopy and for colony-forming units. Colon tissues 
from 41 healthy individuals (controls), 22 with active CD, 16 with inactive CD,
and 7 with chronic inflammation were assessed for levels of MIR106B and ATG16L1
by in situ hybridization and immunohistochemistry.
RESULTS: Silencing Dicer 1, an essential processor of miRs, increased levels of
ATG protein and formation of autophagosomes in cells, indicating that miRs
regulate autophagy. Luciferase reporter assays indicated that MIR106B and MIR93
targeted ATG16L1 mRNA. MIR106B and MIR93 reduced levels of ATG16L1 and autophagy;
these increased following expression of ectopic ATG16L1. In contrast, MIR106B and
MIR93 antagonists increased formation of autophagosomes. Levels of MIR106B were
increased in intestinal epithelia from patients with active CD, whereas levels of
ATG16L1 were reduced, compared with controls. Levels of CMYC were also increased 
in intestinal epithelia of patients with active CD, compared with controls. These
alterations could impair removal of CD-associated bacteria by autophagy.
CONCLUSIONS: In human cell lines, MIR106B and MIR93 reduce levels of ATG16L1 and 
autophagy, and prevent autophagy-dependent eradication of intracellular bacteria.
This process also appears to be altered in colon tissues from patients with
active CD.

Copyright © 2013 AGA Institute. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24036151  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


62. J Virol Methods. 2013 Sep 12. pii: S0166-0934(13)00382-0. doi:
10.1016/j.jviromet.2013.08.035. [Epub ahead of print]

Evaluation of rapid and simple techniques for the enrichment of viruses prior to 
metagenomic virus discovery.

Hall RJ, Wang J, Todd AK, Bissielo AB, Yen S, Strydom H, Moore NE, Ren X, Huang
QS, Carter PE, Peacey M.

Institute of Environmental Science and Research, at the National Centre for
Biosecurity &amp; Infectious Disease, 66 Ward Street, Wallaceville, Upper Hutt, NEW
ZEALAND 5018. Electronic address: richard.hall@esr.cri.nz.

The discovery of new or divergent viruses using metagenomics and high-throughput 
sequencing has become more commonplace. The preparation of a sample is known to
have an effect on the representation of virus sequences within the metagenomic
dataset yet comparatively little attention has been given to this. Physical
enrichment techniques are often applied to samples to increase the number of
viral sequences and therefore enhance the probability of detection. With the
exception of virus ecology studies, there is a paucity of information available
to researchers on the type of sample preparation required for a viral metagenomic
study that seeks to identify an aetiological virus in an animal or human
diagnostic sample. A review of published virus discovery studies revealed the
most commonly used enrichment methods, that were usually quick and simple to
implement, namely low-speed centrifugation, filtration, nuclease-treatment (or
combinations of these) which have been routinely used but often without
justification. These were applied to a simple and well-characterised artificial
sample composed of bacterial and human cells, as well as DNA (adenovirus) and RNA
viruses (influenza A and human enterovirus), being either non-enveloped capsid or
enveloped viruses. The effect of the enrichment method was assessed by
quantitative real-time PCR and metagenomic analysis that incorporated an
amplification step. Reductions in the absolute quantities of bacteria and human
cells were observed for each method as determined by qPCR, but the relative
abundance of viral sequences in the metagenomic dataset remained largely
unchanged. A 3-step method of centrifugation, filtration and nuclease-treatment
showed the greatest increase in the proportion of viral sequences. This study
provides a starting point for the selection of a purification method in future
virus discovery studies, and highlights the need for more data to validate the
effect of enrichment methods on different sample types, amplification,
bioinformatics approaches and sequencing platforms. This study also highlights
the potential risks that may attend selection of a virus enrichment method
without any consideration for the sample type being investigated.

Copyright © 2013 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24036074  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


63. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2013 Sep 11. pii: S0005-2736(13)00296-4. doi:
10.1016/j.bbamem.2013.08.017. [Epub ahead of print]

Viral channel proteins in intracellular protein - protein communication: Vpu of
HIV-1, E5 of HPV16 and p7 of HCV.

Fischer WB, Li LH, Mahato DR, Wang YT, Chen C.

Institute of Biophotonic, School of Biomedical Science and Engineering and
Biophotonics &amp; Molecular Imaging Research Center (BMIRC), National Yang-Ming
University, Taipei 112, Taiwan. Electronic address: wfischer@ym.edu.tw.

Viral channel forming proteins are known for their capability to make the lipid
membrane of the host cell and its subcellular compartments permeable to ions and 
small compounds. There is increasing evidence that some of the representatives of
this class of proteins are also strongly interacting with host proteins and the
effectiveness of this interaction seems to be high. Interaction of viral channel 
proteins with host factors have been proposed by bioinformatics approaches and
have also been identified experimentally. An overview of the interactions with
host proteins is given for Vpu from HIV-1, E5 from HPV-16 and p7 from HCV. This
article is part of a Special Issue entitled:Viral Membrane Proteins - Channels
for Cellular Networking.

© 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24035804  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


64. Am J Pathol. 2013 Sep 10. pii: S0002-9440(13)00542-7. doi:
10.1016/j.ajpath.2013.07.021. [Epub ahead of print]

miR-210 Inhibits Trophoblast Invasion and Is a Serum Biomarker for Preeclampsia.

Anton L, Olarerin-George AO, Schwartz N, Srinivas S, Bastek J, Hogenesch JB,
Elovitz MA.

Maternal and Child Health Research Program, Department of Obstetrics and
Gynecology, Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania; Genomics and Computational Biology Graduate Group,
Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania.

Preeclampsia is characterized by hypertension and proteinuria in pregnant women. 
Its exact cause is unknown. Preeclampsia increases the risk of maternal and fetal
morbidity and mortality. Although delivery, often premature, is the only known
cure, early targeted interventions may improve maternal and fetal outcomes.
Successful intervention requires a better understanding of the molecular etiology
of preeclampsia and the development of accurate methods to predict women at risk.
To this end, we tested the role of miR-210, an miRNA up-regulated in preeclamptic
placentas, in first-trimester extravillous trophoblasts. miR-210 overexpression
reduced trophoblast invasion, a process necessary for uteroplacental perfusion,
in an extracellular signal-regulated kinase/mitogen-activated protein
kinase-dependent manner. Conversely, miR-210 inhibition promoted invasion.
Furthermore, given that the placenta secretes miRNAs into the maternal
circulation, we tested if serum expression of miR-210 was associated with the
disease. We measured miR-210 expression in two clinical studies: a case-control
study and a prospective cohort study. Serum miR-210 expression was significantly 
associated with a diagnosis of preeclampsia (P = 0.007, receiver-operator curve =
0.81) and was predictive of the disease, even months before clinical diagnosis (P
&lt; 0.0001, receiver-operator curve = 0.89). Hence, we conclude that aberrant
expression of miR-210 may contribute to trophoblast function and that miR-210 is 
a novel predictive serum biomarker for preeclampsia that can help in identifying 
at-risk women for monitoring and treatment.

Copyright © 2013 American Society for Investigative Pathology. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24035613  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


65. Bioorg Med Chem Lett. 2013 Aug 27. pii: S0960-894X(13)01019-6. doi:
10.1016/j.bmcl.2013.08.079. [Epub ahead of print]

Identification of new inhibitors for low molecular weight protein tyrosine
phosphatase isoform B.

Seiler CL, Richards KA, Jakubowski HV, McIntee EJ.

Department of Chemistry, College of Saint Benedict, Saint John's University, St. 
Joseph, MN 56374, United States.

The National Cancer Institute Diversity Set II (1356 compounds) and Diversity Set
III (1597 compounds) were screened via in silico methods as potential inhibitors 
of low molecular weight protein tyrosine phosphatase (LWM-PTP) isoform B (EC
3.1.3.48). Those candidates that demonstrated comparable or better docking scores
than that of pyridoxal 5'-phosphate (PLP), one of the most potent known
inhibitors of LMW-PTP with a competitive inhibitor dissociation constant (Kis) of
7.6μM (pH 5.0), were analyzed via in vitro kinetic assays against LMW-PTP isoform
B. While none of the compounds tested in vitro was significantly better that PLP,
five compounds showed comparable inhibition. These five compounds are very
diverse in structure and represent new therapeutic leads for inhibition of this
isozyme.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24035092  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


66. BMC Genomics. 2013 Sep 14;14(1):622. [Epub ahead of print]

Domain exchange at the 3' end of the gene encoding the fratricide meningococcal
two-partner secretion protein A.

Arenas J, Schipper K, van Ulsen P, van der Ende A, Tommassen J.

BACKGROUND: Two-partner secretion systems in Gram-negative bacteria consist of an
outer membrane protein TpsB that mediates the secretion of a cognate TpsA protein
into the extracellular milieu. TpsA proteins have diverse, often
virulence-related functions, and some of them inhibit the growth of related
bacteria. In Neisseria meningitidis, several functions have been attributed to
the TpsA proteins. Downstream of the tpsB and tpsA genes, several shorter
tpsA-related gene cassettes, called tpsC, are located interspersed with
intervening open-reading frames (IORFs). It has been suggested that the tpsC
cassettes may recombine with the tpsA gene as a mechanism of antigenic variation.
Here, we investigated (i) whether TpsA of N. meningitidis also has
growth-inhibitory properties, (ii) whether tpsC cassettes recombine with the tpsA
gene, and (iii) what the consequences of such recombination events might be.
RESULTS: We demonstrate that meningococcal TpsA has growth-inhibitory properties 
and that the IORF located immediately downstream of tpsA confers immunity to the 
producing strain. Although bioinformatics analysis suggests that recombination
between tpsC cassettes and tpsA occurs, detailed analysis of the tpsA gene in a
large collection of disease isolates of three clonal complexes revealed that the 
frequency is very low and cannot be a mechanism of antigenic variation. However, 
recombination affected growth inhibition. In vitro experiments revealed that
recombination can be mediated through acquirement of tpsC cassettes from the
environment and it identified the regions involved in the recombination.
CONCLUSIONS: Meningococcal TpsA has growth-inhibitory properties. Recombination
between tpsA and tpsC cassettes occurs in vivo but is rare and has consequences
for growth inhibition. A recombination model is proposed and we propose that the 
main goal of recombination is the collection of new IORFs for protection against 
a variety of TpsA proteins.

PMID: 24034852  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


67. Comput Biol Med. 2013 Oct 1;43(10):1614-21. doi:
10.1016/j.compbiomed.2013.07.022. Epub 2013 Jul 29.

A context evaluation approach for structural comparison of proteins using cross
entropy over n-gram modelling.

Razmara J, Deris SB, Parvizpour S.

Faculty of Computing, Universiti Teknologi Malaysia, Johor Bahru, Malaysia.
Electronic address: razmaraj@gmail.com.

The structural comparison of proteins is a vital step in structural biology that 
is used to predict and analyse a new unknown protein function. Although a number 
of different techniques have been explored, the study to develop new alternative 
methods is still an active research area. The present paper introduces a text
modelling-based technique for the structural comparison of proteins. The method
models the secondary and tertiary structure of proteins in two linear sequences
and then applies them to the comparison of two structures. The technique used for
pairwise comparison of the sequences has been adopted from computational
linguistics and its well-known techniques for analysing and quantifying textual
sequences. To this end, an n-gram modelling technique is used to capture
regularities between sequences, and then, the cross-entropy concept is employed
to measure their similarities. Several experiments are conducted to evaluate the 
performance of the method and compare it with other commonly used programs. The
assessments for information retrieval evaluation demonstrate that the technique
has a high running speed, which is similar to other linear encoding methods, such
as 3D-BLAST, SARST, and TS-AMIR, whereas its accuracy is comparable to CE and
TM-align, which are high accuracy comparison tools. Accordingly, the results
demonstrate that the algorithm has high efficiency compared with other
state-of-the-art methods.

© 2013 Elsevier Ltd. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24034753  [PubMed - in process]


68. Comput Biol Med. 2013 Oct 1;43(10):1363-73. doi:
10.1016/j.compbiomed.2013.06.014. Epub 2013 Jul 4.

ICP: A novel approach to predict prognosis of prostate cancer with inner-class
clustering of gene expression data.

Kim H, Ahn J, Park C, Yoon Y, Park S.

Department of Computer Science, Yonsei University, South Korea.

Prostate cancer has heterogeneous characteristics. For that reason, even if
tumors appear histologically similar to each other, there are many cases in which
they are actually different, based on their gene expression levels. A single
tumor may have multiple expression levels with both high-risk cancer genes and
low-risk cancer genes. We can produce more useful models for stratifying prostate
cancers into high-risk cancer and low-risk cancer categories by considering the
range in each class through inner-class clustering. In this paper, we attempt to 
classify cancers into high-risk (aggressive) prostate cancer and low-risk
(non-aggressive) prostate cancer using ICP (Inner-class Clustering and
Prediction). Our model classified more efficiently than the models of the
algorithms used for comparison. After discovering a number of genes linked to
prostate cancer from the gene pairs used in our classification, we discovered
that the proposed method can be used to find new unknown genes and gene pairs
which distinguish between high-risk cancer and low-risk cancer.

© 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24034727  [PubMed - in process]


69. Mol Ecol Resour. 2013 Aug 8. doi: 10.1111/1755-0998.12158. [Epub ahead of print]

Conflicting patterns of DNA barcoding and taxonomy in the cicada genus
Tettigettalna from southern Europe (Hemiptera: Cicadidae).

Nunes VL, Mendes R, Marabuto E, Novais BM, Hertach T, Quartau JA, Seabra SG,
Paulo OS, Simões PC.

Computational Biology and Population Genomics Group, Centro de Biologia
Ambiental, DBA/FCUL, Lisboa, 1749-016, Portugal.

DNA barcodes have great potential to assist in species identification, especially
when high taxonomical expertise is required. We investigated the utility of the
5' mitochondrial cytochrome c oxidase I (COI) region to discriminate between 13
European cicada species. These included all nine species currently recognized
under the genus Tettigettalna, from which seven are endemic to the southern
Iberian Peninsula. These cicadas have species-specific male calling songs but are
morphologically very similar. Mean COI divergence between congeners ranged from
0.4% to 10.6%, but this gene was proven insufficient to determine species limits 
within genus Tettigettalna because a barcoding gap was absent for several of its 
species, that is, the highest intraspecific distance exceeded the lowest
interspecific distance. The genetic data conflicted with current taxonomic
classification for T.&nbsp;argentata and T.&nbsp;mariae. Neighbour-joining and Bayesian
analyses revealed that T.&nbsp;argentata is geographically structured (clades North
and South) and might constitute a species complex together with T.&nbsp;aneabi and
T.&nbsp;mariae. The latter diverges very little from the southern clade of
T.&nbsp;argentata and shares with it its most common haplotype. T.&nbsp;mariae is often in 
sympatry with T.&nbsp;argentata but it remains unclear whether introgression or
incomplete lineage sorting may be responsible for the sharing of haplotypes.
T.&nbsp;helianthemi and T.&nbsp;defauti also show high intraspecific variation that might
signal hidden cryptic diversity. These taxonomic conflicts must be re-evaluated
with further studies using additional genes and extensive morphological and
acoustic analyses.

© 2013 John Wiley &amp; Sons Ltd.

PMID: 24034529  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


70. Int J Lab Hematol. 2013 Sep 6. doi: 10.1111/ijlh.12141. [Epub ahead of print]

A resequencing program in India detects the rare JAK2 L579F mutation in patients 
suffering from polycythemia vera and negative for JAK2 V617F.

Acharya A, Vaniawala S, Parekh H, Sheikh H, Patel H, Ali R, Khan A, Nagee A,
Kunjadia P, Mukhopadhyaya PN.

Dr. D. Y. Patil Biotechnology &amp; Bioinformatics Institute, Pune, India.

PMID: 24033912  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


71. Biotechnol Appl Biochem. 2013 Aug 28. doi: 10.1002/bab.1152. [Epub ahead of
print]

Functional and transcriptomic analysis of the regulation of osteoblasts by
mechano-growth factor E peptide.

Xin J, Wang Y, Wang Z, Lin F.

College of Communication Engineering, Chongqing University, Chongqing, 400030,
China; Bioengineering College, Chongqing University, Chongqing, 400030, China.

Mechano-growth factor (MGF), a splice variant of insulin-like growth factor I
(IGF-I), was discovered by Goldspink and colleagues in 1996, since which many
studies have implicated MGF as an important local tissue repair factor. While the
short 24-amino acid C-terminal peptide of MGF (MGF-Ct24E) has a variety of
biological activities, its role in bone formation has not yet been clarified.
Accordingly, the aim of this study was to investigate the role of MGF-Ct24E on
the proliferation, differentiation and mineralization of rat calvarial
osteoblasts. Interestingly, while MGF-Ct24E significantly increased the
proliferation and retarded the differentiation of osteoblasts during the first
three days, prolonged treatment with MGF-Ct24E for up to three weeks promoted
cell differentiation. In order to determine the molecular mechanisms behind this 
plurality, we carried out global transcriptional profiling of osteoblasts in
response to MGF-Ct24E and identified differentially expressed genes by
bioinformatics analysis. Gene ontology (GO) analysis indicated that MGF-Ct24E
enhanced the expression of genes associated with osteoblast proliferation and the
cell cycle, and down-regulated genes involved with osteoblast differentiation,
skeletal system and bone development. Moreover, KEGG pathway-based analysis
indicated that MGF-Ct24E directly altered focal adhesion and cell cycle
progression, in addition to regulating the actin cytoskeleton and gap junctions. 
In conclusion, MGF-Ct24E has a marked ability to increase bone formation by
increasing cell proliferation and delaying cell differentiation during prophase, 
as well as by stimulating osteoblast differentiation during advanced stage. The
mechanism of action of MGF-Ct24E during the initial stages of bone formation in
vitro involves up-regulation of the expression of genes involved in proliferation
and cell cycle progression, and the repression of differentiation-related genes.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24033831  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


72. Evolution. 2013 Sep;67(9):2604-13. doi: 10.1111/evo.12129. Epub 2013 May 11.

Short indels are subject to insertion-biased gene conversion.

Leushkin EV, Bazykin GA.

Department of Bioengineering and Bioinformatics, Lomonosov Moscow State
University, Leninskye Gory 1-73, Moscow, 119992, Russia; Institute for
Information Transmission Problems of the Russian Academy of Sciences (Kharkevich 
Institute), Bolshoi Karetny pereulok, 19, Moscow, 127994, Russia.
leushkin@gmail.com.

Recombination between homologous loci is accompanied by formation of
heteroduplexes. Repairing mismatches in heteroduplexes often leads to single
nucleotide substitutions in a process known as gene conversion. Gene conversion
was shown to be GC-biased in different organisms; that is, a W(A or T)→S(G or C) 
substitution is more likely in this process than a S→W substitution. Here, we
show that the insertion/deletion ratio for short noncoding indels that reach
fixation between species is positively correlated with the recombination rate in 
Drosophila melanogaster, Homo sapiens, and Saccharomyces cerevisiae. This
correlation is both due to an increase of the fixation rate of insertions and
decrease of the fixation rate of deletions in regions of high recombination.
Whole-genome data on indel polymorphism and divergence in D. melanogaster rule
out mutation biases and selection as the cause of this trend, pointing to
insertion-biased gene conversion as the most likely explanation. The bias toward 
insertions is the strongest for single-nucleotide indels, and decreases with
indel length. In regions of high recombination rate this bias leads to an up to
∼5-fold excess of fixed short insertions over deletions, and substantially
affects the evolution of DNA segments.

© 2013 The Author(s). Evolution © 2013 The Society for the Study of Evolution.

PMID: 24033170  [PubMed - in process]


73. Biometrics. 2013 Aug 22:1-12. doi: 10.1111/biom.12068. [Epub ahead of print]

A hierarchical model for probabilistic independent component analysis of
multi-subject fMRI studies.

Guo Y, Tang L.

Department of Biostatistics and Bioinformatics, Rollins School of Public Health, 
Emory University, Atlanta, Georgia 30322, U.S.A.

An important goal in fMRI studies is to decompose the observed series of brain
images to identify and characterize underlying brain functional networks.
Independent component analysis (ICA) has been shown to be a powerful
computational tool for this purpose. Classic ICA has been successfully applied to
single-subject fMRI data. The extension of ICA to group inferences in
neuroimaging studies, however, is challenging due to the unavailability of a
pre-specified group design matrix. Existing group ICA methods generally
concatenate observed fMRI data across subjects on the temporal domain and then
decompose multi-subject data in a similar manner to single-subject ICA. The major
limitation of existing methods is that they ignore between-subject variability in
spatial distributions of brain functional networks in group ICA. In this article,
we propose a new hierarchical probabilistic group ICA method to formally model
subject-specific effects in both temporal and spatial domains when decomposing
multi-subject fMRI data. The proposed method provides model-based estimation of
brain functional networks at both the population and subject level. An important 
advantage of the hierarchical model is that it provides a formal statistical
framework to investigate similarities and differences in brain functional
networks across subjects, for example, subjects with mental disorders or
neurodegenerative diseases such as Parkinson's as compared to normal subjects. We
develop an EM algorithm for model estimation where both the E-step and M-step
have explicit forms. We compare the performance of the proposed hierarchical
model with that of two popular group ICA methods via simulation studies. We
illustrate our method with application to an fMRI study of Zen meditation.

© 2013, The International Biometric Society.

PMID: 24033125  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


74. New Phytol. 2013 Sep 13. doi: 10.1111/nph.12458. [Epub ahead of print]

A synthetic framework for modeling the genetic basis of phenotypic plasticity and
its costs.

Zhai Y, Lv Y, Li X, Wu W, Bo W, Shen D, Xu F, Pang X, Zheng B, Wu R.

Center for Computational Biology, Beijing Forestry University, Beijing, 100083,
China.

The phenotype of an individual is controlled not only by its genes, but also by
the environment in which it grows. A growing body of evidence shows that the
extent to which phenotypic changes are driven by the environment, known as
phenotypic plasticity, is also under genetic control, but an overall picture of
genetic variation for phenotypic plasticity remains elusive. Here, we develop a
model for mapping quantitative trait loci (QTLs) that regulate
environment-induced plastic response. This model enables geneticists to test
whether there exist actual QTLs that determine phenotypic plasticity and, if
there are, further test how plasticity QTLs control the costs of plastic response
by dissecting the genetic correlation of phenotypic plasticity and trait value.
The model was used to analyze real data for grain yield of winter wheat (Triticum
aestivum), leading to the detection of pleiotropic QTLs and epistatic QTLs that
affect phenotypic plasticity and its cost in this crop.

© 2013 The Authors. New Phytologist © 2013 New Phytologist Trust.

PMID: 24032980  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


75. Phys Rev E Stat Nonlin Soft Matter Phys. 2013 Aug;88(2):022713. Epub 2013 Aug 20.

Multiscale codes in the nervous system: The problem of noise correlations and the
ambiguity of periodic scales.

Mathis A, Herz AV, Stemmler MB.

Bernstein Center for Computational Neuroscience, and Department of Biology II,
Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München, 82152 Planegg-Martinsried, Germany.

Encoding information about continuous variables using noisy computational units
is a challenge; nonetheless, asymptotic theory shows that combining multiple
periodic scales for coding can be highly precise despite the corrupting influence
of noise [Mathis, Herz, and Stemmler, Phys. Rev. Lett. 109, 018103 (2012)].
Indeed, the cortex seems to use periodic, multiscale grid codes to represent
position accurately. Here we show how such codes can be read out without taking
the long-term limit; even on short time scales, the precision of such codes
scales exponentially in the number N of neurons. Does this finding also hold for 
neurons that are not firing in a statistically independent fashion? To assess the
extent to which biological grid codes are subject to statistical dependences, we 
first analyze the noise correlations between pairs of grid code neurons in
behaving rodents. We find that if the grids of two neurons align and have the
same length scale, the noise correlations between the neurons can reach values as
high as 0.8. For increasing mismatches between the grids of the two neurons, the 
noise correlations fall rapidly. Incorporating such correlations into a
population coding model reveals that the correlations lessen the resolution, but 
the exponential scaling of resolution with N is unaffected.

PMID: 24032870  [PubMed - in process]


76. Phys Rev E Stat Nonlin Soft Matter Phys. 2013 Aug;88(2):022710. Epub 2013 Aug 14.

Exact partition function zeros of the Wako-Saitô-Muñoz-Eaton β hairpin model.

Lee J.

Department of Bioinformatics and Life Science, Soongsil University, Seoul
156-743, Korea.

I compute exact partition function zeros of β hairpins, using both analytic and
numerical methods, extending previous work [J. Lee, Phys. Rev. Lett. 110, 248101 
(2013)] where only a restricted class of hairpins was considered. The zeros of β 
hairpins with an odd number of peptide bonds are computed and the difference of
the distribution of zeros from those for an even number of peptide bonds is
explained in terms of additional entropy of liberating the extra bond at the turn
region. Upon the introduction of a hydrophobic core in the central region of the 
hairpin, the zeros are distributed uniformly on two concentric circles
corresponding to the hydrophobic collapse and the transition to the fully folded 
conformation. One of the circles dissolves as the core moves toward the turn or
the tip region, which is explained in terms of the similarity of the intermediate
state with the folded or unfolded states. The exact partition function zeros for 
a hairpin with a more complex structure of native contacts, the 16 C-terminal
residues of streptococcal protein G B1, are numerically computed and their loci
are closely approximated by concentric circles.

PMID: 24032867  [PubMed - in process]


77. Phys Rev E Stat Nonlin Soft Matter Phys. 2013 Aug;88(2):022703. Epub 2013 Aug 8.

Role of directional fidelity in multiple aspects of extreme performance of the
F_{1}-ATPase motor.

Hou R, Wang Z.

Department of Physics, National University of Singapore, Singapore 117542 and
Center for Computational Science and Engineering, National University of
Singapore, Singapore 117542.

Quantitative understanding of the best possible performance of nanomotors allowed
by physical laws pertains to the study of nanomotors from biology as well as
nanotechnology. The biological nanomotor F_{1} ATPase is the best available model
system as it is the only nanomotor known for extreme energy conversion near the
limit of energy conservation. Using a unified theoretical framework centered on a
concept called directional fidelity, we analyze recent experiments in which the
F_{1} motor's performance was measured for controlled chemical potentials and
expose from the experiments quantitative evidence for the motor's multiple
extreme performances in directional fidelity, speed, and catalytic capability
close to physical limits. Specifically, the motor nearly exhausts the available
energy from the fuel to retain the highest possible directional fidelity for an
arbitrary load, encompassing the motor's extreme energy conversion and beyond.
The theory-experiment comparison implies a tight chemomechanical coupling up to
stalemate as futile steps occur, but unlikely involve fuel consumption. The
F_{1}-motor data also help clarify the relation between directional fidelity and 
experimentally measured stepping ratio.

PMID: 24032860  [PubMed - in process]


78. Phys Rev E Stat Nonlin Soft Matter Phys. 2013 Aug;88(2):022701. Epub 2013 Aug 1.

DNA-binding-protein inhomogeneity in E. coli modeled as biphasic facilitated
diffusion.

Kuhlman TE, Cox EC.

Department of Physics, Center for the Physics of Living Cells, and Center for
Biophysics and Computational Biology, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign,
Urbana, Illinois 61801-3080, USA.

We have recently shown that nonspecifically bound lac repressors are spatially
inhomogeneous in E. coli cells and depends upon the location of its encoding gene
and the DNA compaction state [Kuhlman and Cox, Mol. Syst. Biol. 8, 610 (2012)].
Here we model this inhomogeneity as a consequence of diffusion within and
exchange between two distinct intracellular phases: the condensed chromosomal DNA
and an extrachromosomal compartment, the cytoplasm. We discuss the consequences
of this model for the target search process.

PMID: 24032858  [PubMed - in process]


79. J Proteome Res. 2013 Sep 16. [Epub ahead of print]

Improving the identification rate of endogenous peptide using electron transfer
dissociation and collision-induced dissociation.

Hayakawa E, Menschaert G, De Bock PJ, Luyten W, Gevaert K, Baggerman G, Schoofs
L.

Tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) combined with bioinformatics tools have enabled 
fast and systematic protein identification based on peptide-to-spectrum matches. 
However, it remains challenging to obtain accurate identification of endogenous
peptides, such as neuropeptides, peptide hormones, peptide pheromones, venom
peptides and antimicrobial peptides. Since these peptides are processed at sites 
that are difficult to predict reliably, the search of their MS/MS spectra in
sequence databases needs to be done without any protease setting. In addition,
many endogenous peptides carry various post-translational modifications, making
it essential to take these into account in the database search. These
characteristics of endogenous peptides result in a huge search space, frequently 
leading to poor confidence of the peptide characterizations. We have developed a 
new MS/MS spectrum search tool for highly accurate and confident identification
of endogenous peptides by combining two different fragmentation methods. Our
approach takes advantage of the combination of two independent fragmentation
methods (collision-induced dissociation and electron transfer dissociation).
Their peptide spectral matching is carried out separately in both methods, and
the final score is built as a combination of the two separate scores. We
demonstrate that this approach is very effective in discriminating correct
peptide identifications from false hits. We applied this approach to a spectral
data set of neuropeptides extracted from mouse pituitary tumor cells. Compared to
conventional MS-based identification, i.e., using a single fragmentation method, 
our approach significantly increased the peptide identification rate. It proved
also highly effective for scanning spectra against a very large search space,
enabling more accurate genome-wide searches and searches including multiple
potential post-translational modifications.

PMID: 24032530  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


80. Front Genet. 2013 Aug 26;4:160.

The Role and Challenges of Exome Sequencing in Studies of Human Diseases.

Wang Z, Liu X, Yang BZ, Gelernter J.

Department of Biostatistics, Yale School of Public Health, Yale University New
Haven, CT, USA.

Recent advances in next-generation sequencing technologies have transformed the
genetics study of human diseases; this is an era of unprecedented productivity.
Exome sequencing, the targeted sequencing of the protein-coding portion of the
human genome, has been shown to be a powerful and cost-effective method for
detection of disease variants underlying Mendelian disorders. Increasing effort
has been made in the interest of the identification of rare variants associated
with complex traits in sequencing studies. Here we provided an overview of the
application fields for exome sequencing in human diseases. We describe a general 
framework of computation and bioinformatics for handling sequencing data. We then
demonstrate data quality and agreement between exome sequencing and exome
microarray (chip) genotypes using data collected on the same set of subjects in a
genetic study of panic disorder. Our results show that, in sequencing data, the
data quality was generally higher for variants within the exonic target regions, 
compared to that outside the target regions, due to the target enrichment. We
also compared genotype concordance for variant calls obtained by exome sequencing
vs. exome genotyping microarrays. The overall consistency rate was &gt;99.83% and
the heterozygous consistency rate was &gt;97.55%. The two platforms share a large
amount of agreement over low frequency variants in the exonic regions, while
exome sequencing provides much more information on variants not included on exome
genotyping microarrays. The results demonstrate that exome sequencing data are of
high quality and can be used to investigate the role of rare coding variants in
human diseases.

PMCID: PMC3752524
PMID: 24032039  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


81. Braz J Microbiol. 2012 Oct;43(4):1632-40. doi: 10.1590/S1517-838220120004000048. 
Epub 2012 Jun 1.

Pseudorabies virus can be classified into five genotypes using partial sequences 
of UL44.

Fonseca AA Jr, Camargos MF, Sales ML, Heinemann MB, Leite RC, Reis JK.

Laboratório Nacional Agropecuário, Ministério da Agricultura, Pecuária e
Abastecimento , Pedro Leopoldo, MG , Brasil.

Suid herpesvirus 1 (SuHV-1) is the causative agent of pseudorabies (PR), a
disease of great importance due to the huge losses it causes in the swine
industry. The aim of this study was to determine a method for genotyping SuHV-1
based on partial sequences of the gene coding for glycoprotein C (gC) and to
elucidate the possible reasons for the variability of this region. A total of 109
gCsequences collected from GenBank were divided into five major groups after
reconstruction of a phylogenetic tree by Bayesian inference. The analysis showed 
that a portion of gC (approximately 671 bp) is under selective pressure at
various points that coincide with regions of protein disorder. It was also
possible to divide SuHV-1 into five genotypes that evolved under different
selective pressures. These genotypes are not specific to countries or continents,
perhaps due to multiple introduction events related to the importation of swine.

PMCID: PMC3769038
PMID: 24031995  [PubMed]


82. Brain. 2013 Sep 11. [Epub ahead of print]

Next generation sequencing for molecular diagnosis of neurological disorders
using ataxias as a model.

Németh AH, Kwasniewska AC, Lise S, Parolin Schnekenberg R, Becker EB, Bera KD,
Shanks ME, Gregory L, Buck D, Zameel Cader M, Talbot K, de Silva R, Fletcher N,
Hastings R, Jayawant S, Morrison PJ, Worth P, Taylor M, Tolmie J, O'Regan M; UK
Ataxia Consortium, Valentine R, Packham E, Evans J, Seller A, Ragoussis J.

1 Nuffield Department of Clinical Neurosciences, University of Oxford, Oxford OX3
9DU, UK.

Many neurological conditions are caused by immensely heterogeneous gene
mutations. The diagnostic process is often long and complex with most patients
undergoing multiple invasive and costly investigations without ever reaching a
conclusive molecular diagnosis. The advent of massively parallel, next-generation
sequencing promises to revolutionize genetic testing and shorten the 'diagnostic 
odyssey' for many of these patients. We performed a pilot study using
heterogeneous ataxias as a model neurogenetic disorder to assess the introduction
of next-generation sequencing into clinical practice. We captured 58 known human 
ataxia genes followed by Illumina Next-Generation Sequencing in 50 highly
heterogeneous patients with ataxia who had been extensively investigated and were
refractory to diagnosis. All cases had been tested for spinocerebellar ataxia
1-3, 6, 7 and Friedrich's ataxia and had multiple other biochemical, genetic and 
invasive tests. In those cases where we identified the genetic mutation, we
determined the time to diagnosis. Pathogenicity was assessed using a
bioinformatics pipeline and novel variants were validated using functional
experiments. The overall detection rate in our heterogeneous cohort was 18% and
varied from 8.3% in those with an adult onset progressive disorder to 40% in
those with a childhood or adolescent onset progressive disorder. The highest
detection rate was in those with an adolescent onset and a family history (75%). 
The majority of cases with detectable mutations had a childhood onset but most
are now adults, reflecting the long delay in diagnosis. The delays were primarily
related to lack of easily available clinical testing, but other factors included 
the presence of atypical phenotypes and the use of indirect testing. In the cases
where we made an eventual diagnosis, the delay was 3-35 years (mean 18.1 years). 
Alignment and coverage metrics indicated that the capture and sequencing was
highly efficient and the consumable cost was ∼£400 (€460 or US$620). Our
pathogenicity interpretation pathway predicted 13 different mutations in eight
different genes: PRKCG, TTBK2, SETX, SPTBN2, SACS, MRE11, KCNC3 and DARS2 of
which nine were novel including one causing a newly described recessive ataxia
syndrome. Genetic testing using targeted capture followed by next-generation
sequencing was efficient, cost-effective, and enabled a molecular diagnosis in
many refractory cases. A specific challenge of next-generation sequencing data is
pathogenicity interpretation, but functional analysis confirmed the pathogenicity
of novel variants showing that the pipeline was robust. Our results have broad
implications for clinical neurology practice and the approach to diagnostic
testing.

PMID: 24030952  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


83. Proteomics. 2013 Sep 9. doi: 10.1002/pmic.201300031. [Epub ahead of print]

Proteome Analysis of Functionally Differentiated Bovine (Bos indicus) Mammary
Epithelial Cells isolated from Milk.

Janjanam J, Jamwal M, Singh S, Kumar S, Panigrahi AK, Hariprasad G, Jena MK,
Anand V, Kumar S, Kaushik JK, Dang AK, Mukesh M, Mishra BP, Srinivasan A, Reddy
VS, Mohanty AK.

National Dairy Research Institute (NDRI), Karnal, India; Current address: Dept.
of Chemistry, Michigan Technological University, Houghton, MI, 49931, USA.

Mammary gland is made up of a branching network of ducts that end in alveoli.
Terminally differentiated mammary epithelial cells (MECs) constitute the
innermost layer of aveoli. They are milk secreting cuboidal cells that secrete
milk proteins during lactation. Little is known about the expression profile of
proteins in the metabolically active MECs during lactation or their functional
role in the lactation process. In the present investigation we have reported the 
proteome map of MECs in lactating cows using 2-DE MALDI-TOF/TOF MS and
1-D-Gel-LC-MS/MS. MECs were isolated from milk using immunomagnetic beads and
confirmed by RT-PCR and western blotting. The 1-D-Gel-LC-MS/MS and 2-DE-MS/MS
based approaches led to identification of 431 and 134 proteins, respectively,
with a total of 497 unique proteins. Proteins identified in this study were
clustered into functional groups using bioinformatics tools. Pathway analysis of 
the identified proteins revealed 28 pathways (P &lt; 0.05) providing evidence for
involvement of various proteins in lactation function. This study further
provides experimental evidence for the presence of many proteins that have been
predicted in annotated bovine genome. The data generated further provides a set
of bovine MEC specific proteins which will help the researchers to understand the
molecular events taking place during lactation. This article is protected by
copyright. All rights reserved.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24030930  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


84. Database (Oxford). 2013 Sep 11;2013:bat063. doi: 10.1093/database/bat063. Print
2013.

IQdb: an intelligence quotient score-associated gene resource for human
intelligence.

Kong L, Cheng L, Fan LY, Zhao M, Qu H.

Center for Bioinformatics, State Key Laboratory of Protein and Plant Gene
Research, College of Life Sciences, Peking University, Beijing 100871, P.R.
China.

Intelligence quotient (IQ) is the most widely used phenotype to characterize
human cognitive abilities. Recent advances in studies on human intelligence have 
identified many new susceptibility genes. However, the genetic mechanisms
involved in IQ score and the relationship between IQ score and the risk of mental
disorders have won little attention. To address the genetic complexity of IQ
score, we have developed IQdb (http://IQdb.cbi.pku.edu.cn), a publicly available 
database for exploring IQ-associated human genes. In total, we collected 158
experimental verified genes from literature as a core dataset in IQdb. In
addition, 46 genomic regions related to IQ score have been curated from
literature. Based on the core dataset and 46 confirmed linked genomic regions,
more than 6932 potential IQ-related genes are expanded using data of
protein-protein interactions. A systematic gene ranking approach was applied to
all the collected and expanded genes to represent the relative importance of all 
the 7090 genes in IQdb. Our further systematic pathway analysis reveals that
IQ-associated genes are significantly enriched in multiple signal events,
especially related to cognitive systems. Of the 158 genes in the core dataset, 81
are involved in various psychotic and mental disorders. This comprehensive gene
resource illustrates the importance of IQdb to our understanding on human
intelligence, and highlights the utility of IQdb for elucidating the functions of
IQ-associated genes and the cross-talk mechanisms among cognition-related
pathways in some mental disorders for community. Database URL:
http://IQdb.cbi.pku.edu.cn.

PMCID: PMC3770929
PMID: 24030781  [PubMed - in process]


85. Brief Bioinform. 2013 Sep;14(5):527. doi: 10.1093/bib/bbt064.

Editorial: International, interdisciplinary, multi-level bioinformatics training 
and education.

Schneider MV, Jungck JR.

PMID: 24030777  [PubMed - in process]


86. Mol Cell Proteomics. 2013 Sep 13. [Epub ahead of print]

Quantitative Proteomic and Functioanl Analysis of Liver Mitochondria from High
Fat Diet Diabetic Mice.

Guo Y, Darshi M, Ma Y, Perkins GA, Shen Z, Haushalter KJ, Saito R, Chen A, Lee
YS, Patel HH, Briggs SP, Ellisman MH, Olefsky JM, Taylor SS.

University of California, San Diego, United States;

Insulin resistance plays a major role in the development of type 2 diabetes (T2D)
and obesity and affects a number of biological processes such as mitochondrial
biogenesis. Though mitochondrial dysfunction has been linked to the development
of insulin resistance and pathogenesis of T2D,, the precise mechanism linking the
two is not well understood. We used high fat diet (HFD)-induced obesity dependent
diabetes mouse models to gain insight into the potential pathways altered with
metabolic disease, and carried out quantitative proteomic analysis of liver
mitochondria. As previously reported, proteins involved in fatty acid oxidation, 
branched chain amino acid degradation, tricarboxylic acid cycle, and oxidative
phosphorylation were uniformly up-regulated in HFD fed mice compared to that of
normal diet (ND).. Further, our studies revealed that retinol metabolism is
distinctly down-regulated and the mitochondrial structural proteins -components
of mitochondrial inter-membrane space bridging (MIB) complex (Mitofilin, Sam50
and ChChd3), and Tim proteins- essential for protein import, are significantly
up-regulated in HFD fed mice. Structural and functional studies on HFD- and ND
liver mitochondria revealed remodeling of HFD mitochondria to a more condensed
form with increased respiratory capacity and higher ATP levels compared to ND
mitochondria. Thus, it is likely that the structural remodeling is essential to
accommodate the increased protein content in presence of HFD: the mechanism could
be through the MIB-complex promoting contact site and crista junction formation
and in turn facilitating the lipid and protein uptake.

PMID: 24030101  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


87. Ann Biomed Eng. 2013 Sep 13. [Epub ahead of print]

Microstructured Extracellular Matrices in Tissue Engineering and Development: An 
Update.

Tien J, Nelson CM.

Department of Biomedical Engineering, Boston University, 44 Cummington Mall,
Boston, MA, 02215, USA, jtien@bu.edu.

Microstructured extracellular matrix (ECM), which contains heterogeneous features
of the same size scale (5-100&nbsp;μm) as tissue organoids, has become an important
material for the engineering of functional tissues and for the study of
tissue-level biology. This review describes methods to generate this class of
ECM, and highlights recent advances in the application of microstructured ECM to 
problems in basic and applied biology. It also discusses computational techniques
to analyze and optimize the microstructural patterns for a desired functional
output.

PMID: 24030067  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


88. J Microbiol Methods. 2013 Sep 9. pii: S0167-7012(13)00274-1. doi:
10.1016/j.mimet.2013.08.011. [Epub ahead of print]

High throughput sequencing methods and analysis for microbiome research.

Di Bella JM, Bao Y, Gloor GB, Burton JP, Reid G.

Department of Microbiology and Immunology, The University of Western Ontario,
London, ON, Canada.

High-throughput sequencing technology is rapidly improving in quality, speed and 
cost. It is therefore becoming more widely used to study whole communities of
prokaryotes in many niches. This review discusses these techniques, including
nucleic acid extraction from different environments, sample preparation and
high-throughput sequencing platforms. We also discuss commonly used and recently 
developed bioinformatic tools applied to microbiomes, including for analyzing
amplicon sequences, metagenome shotgun sequences and metatranscriptome sequences.
This field is relatively new and rapidly evolving, thus we hope that this review 
will provide a baseline for understanding these methods of microbiome analyses.
Additionally, we seek to stimulate others to solve the many problems that still
exist with the sensitivity, specificity and interpretation of high throughput
microbiome sequence analysis.

© 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24029734  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


89. Endocrinology. 2013 Sep 12. [Epub ahead of print]

Effects of Antenatal Synthetic Glucocorticoid on Glucocorticoid Receptor Binding,
DNA Methylation, and Genome-Wide mRNA Levels in the Fetal Male Hippocampus.

Crudo A, Petropoulos S, Suderman M, Moisiadis VG, Kostaki A, Hallett M, Szyf M,
Matthews SG.

Department Pharmacology &amp; Therapeutics (A.C., S.P., M.Su., M.Sz.), McGill
University, Montreal, Canada; Sackler Program for Epigenetics and Psychobiology
(A.C., M.Su., M.Sz.), McGill University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada; Department of 
Physiology (V.G.M., A.K., S.G.M.), Departments of Obstetrics and Gynecology
(S.G.M.), and Department of Medicine (S.G.M.) University of Toronto, Toronto,
Ontario, Canada M5S 1A8; and McGill Centre for Bioinformatics (M.Su., M.H.),
McGill University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada.

The endogenous glucocorticoid (GC) surge in late gestation plays a vital role in 
maturation of several organ systems. For this reason, pregnant women at risk of
preterm labor are administered synthetic glucocorticoids (sGCs) to promote fetal 
lung development. Animal studies have shown that fetal sGC exposure can cause
life-long changes in endocrine and metabolic function. We have previously shown
that antenatal sGC treatment is associated with alterations in global DNA
methylation and modifications to the hippocampal methylome and acetylome. In this
study, we hypothesized that: 1) there are changes in the transcriptional
landscape of the fetal hippocampus in late gestation, associated with the
endogenous cortisol surge; 2) fetal sGC exposure alters genome-wide transcription
in the hippocampus; and 3) these changes in transcription are associated with
modified glucocorticoid receptor (GR) DNA binding and DNA methylation. sGC was
administered as 2 courses on gestational days (GD) 40, 41, 50, and 51, and the
hippocampi of fetal guinea pigs were examined before (GD52) and after (GD65) the 
endogenous cortisol surge (Term ∼GD67). We also analyzed fetal hippocampi 24
hours and 14 days following maternal sGC injections (n = 3-4/group). Genome-wide 
modification of transcription and GR DNA binding occurred in late gestation, in
parallel with the normal GC surge. Further, sGC exposure had a substantial impact
on the hippocampal transcriptome, GR-DNA binding, and DNA methylation at 24 hours
and 14 days following the final sGC treatment. These data support the hypothesis 
that GC exposure in late gestation plays a significant role in modifying the
transcriptional and epigenetic landscape of the developing fetal hippocampus and 
that substantial effects are evident for at least 2 weeks after sGC exposure.

PMID: 24029241  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


90. J Biomol Struct Dyn. 2013 Sep 13. [Epub ahead of print]

Plasmodium falciparum Hsp70-x: a heat shock protein at the host-parasite
interface.

Hatherley R, Blatch GL, Bishop OT.

a Department of Biochemistry, Microbiology and Biotechnology, Rhodes University
Bioinformatics (RUBi) , Rhodes University , Grahamstown , 6140 , South Africa.

Plasmodium falciparum 70 kDa heat shock proteins (PfHsp70s) are expressed at all 
stages of the pathogenic erythrocytic phase of the malaria parasite life cycle.
There are six PfHsp70s, all of which have orthologues in other plasmodial
species, except for PfHsp70-x which is unique to P. falciparum. This research
highlights a number of original results obtained by a detailed bioinformatics
analysis of the protein. Large-scale sequence analysis indicated the presence of 
an extended transit peptide sequence of PfHsp70-x which potentially directs it to
the endoplasmic reticulum (ER). Further analysis showed that PfHsp70-x does not
have an ER-retention sequence, suggesting that the protein transits through the
ER and is secreted into the parasitophorous vacuole or beyond into the
erythrocyte cytosol. These results are consistent with experimental findings.
Next, possible interactions between PfHsp70-x and exported P. falciparum Hsp40s
or host erythrocyte Hsp40 were interrogated by modelling and docking. Docking
results indicated that interaction between PfHsp70-x and each of the Hsp40s,
regardless of biological feasibility, seems equally likely. This suggests that J 
domain might not provide the specificity in the formation of unique Hsp70-Hsp40
complexes, but that the specificity might be provided by other domains of Hsp40s.
By studying different structural conformations of PfHsp70-x, it was shown that
Hsp40s can only bind when PfHsp70-x is in a certain conformation. Additionally,
this work highlighted the possible dependence of the substrate-binding domain
residues on the orientation of the α-helical lid for formation of the
substrate-binding pocket.

PMID: 24028577  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


91. BMC Bioinformatics. 2013 Sep 12;14(1):273. [Epub ahead of print]

Learning a Markov Logic network for supervised gene regulatory network inference.

Brouard C, Vrain C, Dubois J, Castel D, Debily MA, d'Alché-Buc F.

BACKGROUND: Gene regulatory network inference remains a challenging problem in
systems biology despite the numerous approaches that have been proposed. When
substantial knowledge on a gene regulatory network is already available,
supervised network inference is appropriate. Such a method builds a binary
classifier able to assign a class (Regulation/No regulation) to an ordered pair
of genes. Once learnt, the pairwise classifier can be used to predict new
regulations. In this work, we explore the framework of Markov Logic Networks
(MLN) that combine features of probabilistic graphical models with the
expressivity of first-order logic rules.
RESULTS: We propose to learn a Markov Logic network, e.g. a set of weighted rules
that conclude on the predicate "regulates", starting from a known gene regulatory
network involved in the switch proliferation/differentiation of keratinocyte
cells, a set of experimental transcriptomic data and various descriptions of
genes all encoded into first-order logic. As training data are unbalanced, we use
asymmetric bagging to learn a set of MLNs. The prediction of a new regulation can
then be obtained by averaging predictions of individual MLNs. As a side
contribution, we propose three in silico tests to assess the performance of any
pairwise classifier in various network inference tasks on real datasets. A first 
test consists of measuring the average performance on balanced edge prediction
problem; a second one deals with the ability of the classifier, once enhanced by 
asymmetric bagging, to update a given network. Finally our main result concerns a
third test that measures the ability of the method to predict regulations with a 
new set of genes. As expected, MLN, when provided with only numerical discretized
gene expression data, does not perform as well as a pairwise SVM in terms of
AUPR. However, when a more complete description of gene properties is provided by
heterogeneous sources, MLN achieves the same performance as a black-box model
such as a pairwise SVM while providing relevant insights on the predictions.
CONCLUSIONS: The numerical studies show that MLN achieves very good predictive
performance while opening the door to some interpretability of the decisions.
Besides the ability to suggest new regulations, such an approach allows to
cross-validate experimental data with existing knowledge.

PMID: 24028533  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


92. J Biomol Struct Dyn. 2013 Sep 13. [Epub ahead of print]

Zebra: a web server for bioinformatic analysis of diverse protein families.

Suplatov D, Kirilin E, Takhaveev V, Svedas V.

a Faculty of Bioengineering and Bioinformatics , Belozersky Institute of
Physicochemical Biology, Lomonosov Moscow State University , Vorobjev hills, 1-40
, Moscow , 119991 , Russia.

During evolution of proteins from a common ancestor, one functional property can 
be preserved while others can vary leading to functional diversity. A systematic 
study of the corresponding adaptive mutations provides a key to one of the most
challenging problems of modern structural biology - understanding the impact of
amino acid substitutions on protein function. The subfamily-specific positions
(SSPs) are conserved within functional subfamilies but are different between them
and, therefore, seem to be responsible for functional diversity in protein
superfamilies. Consequently, a corresponding method to perform the bioinformatic 
analysis of sequence and structural data has to be implemented in the common
laboratory practice to study the structure-function relationship in proteins and 
develop novel protein engineering strategies. This paper describes Zebra web
server - a powerful remote platform that implements a novel bioinformatic
analysis algorithm to study diverse protein families. It is the first application
that provides specificity determinants at different levels of functional
classification, therefore addressing complex functional diversity of large
superfamilies. Statistical analysis is implemented to automatically select a set 
of highly significant SSPs to be used as hotspots for directed evolution or
rational design experiments and analyzed studying the structure-function
relationship. Zebra results are provided in two ways - (1) as a single all-in-one
parsable text file and (2) as PyMol sessions with structural representation of
SSPs. Zebra web server is available at http://biokinet.belozersky.msu.ru/zebra .

PMID: 24028489  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


93. J Biomol Struct Dyn. 2013 Sep 13. [Epub ahead of print]

Structure-wise discrimination of cytosine, thymine, and uracil by proteins in
terms of their nonbonded interactions.

Usha S, Selvaraj S.

a Department of Bioinformatics, School of Life Sciences , Bharathidasan
University , Tiruchirappalli , 620 024 , Tamilnadu , India.

The molecular recognition and discrimination of very similar ligand moieties by
proteins are important subjects in protein-ligand interaction studies.
Specificity in the recognition of molecules is determined by the arrangement of
protein and ligand atoms in space. The three pyrimidine bases, viz. cytosine,
thymine, and uracil, are structurally similar, but the proteins that bind to them
are able to discriminate them and form interactions. Since nonbonded interactions
are responsible for molecular recognition processes in biological systems, our
work attempts to understand some of the underlying principles of such recognition
of pyrimidine molecular structures by proteins. The preferences of the amino acid
residues to contact the pyrimidine bases in terms of nonbonded interactions;
amino acid residue-ligand atom preferences; main chain and side chain atom
contributions of amino acid residues; and solvent-accessible surface area of
ligand atoms when forming complexes are analyzed. Our analysis shows that the
amino acid residues, tyrosine and phenyl alanine, are highly involved in the
pyrimidine interactions. Arginine prefers contacts with the cytosine base. The
similarities and differences that exist between the interactions of the amino
acid residues with each of the three pyrimidine base atoms in our analysis
provide insights that can be exploited in designing specific inhibitors
competitive to the ligands.

PMID: 24028440  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


94. J Chem Phys. 2013 Sep 7;139(9):094113. doi: 10.1063/1.4818599.

Trimer effects in fragment molecular orbital-linear combination of molecular
orbitals calculation of one-electron orbitals for biomolecules.

Kobori T, Sodeyama K, Otsuka T, Tateyama Y, Tsuneyuki S.

RIKEN Quantitative Biology Center (QBiC), 1-6-5 Minatojima-Minamimachi, Chuo-ku, 
Kobe, Hyogo 650-0047, Japan.

The fragment molecular orbital (FMO)-linear combination of molecular orbitals
(LCMO) method incorporates as an efficient post-process calculation of
one-electron orbitals of the whole system after the FMO total energy calculation.
A straightforward way to increase the accuracy is inclusion of the trimer effect.
Here, we derive a comprehensive formulation called the FMO3-LCMO method. To keep 
the computational costs of the trimer term low enough, we use a matrix-size
reduction technique. We evaluated the accuracy and efficiency of the FMO3-LCMO
scheme in model biological systems (alanine oligomer and chignolin). The results 
show that delocalized electronic orbitals with covalent and hydrogen bonds are
better described at the trimer level, and the FMO3-LCMO method is applicable to
quantitative evaluations of a wide range of frontier orbitals in large
biosystems.

PMID: 24028108  [PubMed - in process]


95. BMC Med Genomics. 2013 Sep 12;6(1):31. [Epub ahead of print]

Genotyping of human neutrophil antigens (HNA) from whole genome sequencing data.

Chu HT, Lin H, Tsao TT, Chang CF, Hsiao WW, Yeh TJ, Chang CM, Liu YW, Wang TY,
Yang KC, Chen TJ, Chen JC, Chen KC, Kao CY.

BACKGROUND: Neutrophil antigens are involved in a variety of clinical conditions 
including transfusion-related acute lung injury (TRALI) and other
transfusion-related diseases. Recently, there are five characterized groups of
human neutrophil antigen (HNA) systems, the HNA1 to 5. Characterization of all
neutrophil antigens from whole genome sequencing (WGS) data may be accomplished
for revealing complete genotyping formats of neutrophil antigens collectively at 
genome level with molecular variations which may respectively be revealed with
available genotyping techniques for neutrophil antigens conventionally.
RESULTS: We developed a computing method for the genotyping of human neutrophil
antigens. Six samples from two families, available from the 1000 Genomes
projects, were used for a HNA typing test. There are 500 ~ 3000 reads per sample 
filtered from the adopted human WGS datasets in order for identifying single
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) of neutrophil antigens. The visualization of read
alignment shows that the yield reads from WGS dataset are enough to cover all of 
the SNP loci for the antigen system: HNA1, HNA3, HNA4 and HNA5. Consequently, our
implemented Bioinformatics tool successfully revealed HNA types on all of the six
samples including sequence-based typing (SBT) as well as PCR sequence-specific
oligonucleotide probes (SSOP), PCR sequence-specific primers (SSP) and PCR
restriction fragment length polymorphism (RFLP) along with parentage possibility.
CONCLUSIONS: The next-generation sequencing technology strives to deliver
affordable and non-biased sequencing results, hence the complete genotyping
formats of HNA may be reported collectively from mining the output data of WGS.
The study shows the feasibility of HNA genotyping through new WGS technologies.
Our proposed algorithmic methodology is implemented in a HNATyping software
package with user's guide available to the public at
http://sourceforge.net/projects/hnatyping/.

PMID: 24028078  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


96. Wei Sheng Wu Xue Bao. 2013 Jun 4;53(6):561-8.

[Gene cloning and characterization of a solvent-resistant glucose dehydrogenase
from Bacillus sp. YX-1].

[Article in Chinese]

Zhang B, Zhang R, Wang L, Xu Y.

Key Laboratory of Industrial Biotechnology, Ministry of Education, School of
Biotechnology, Jiangnan University, Wuxi 214122, China.
zhangbotao1986@yahoo.com.cn

OBJECTIVE: A gene encoding solvent-resistant glucose dehydrogenase was cloned
from Bacillus sp. YX-1 and expressed in Escherichia coli. The recombinant enzyme 
was then characterized.
METHODS: The glucose dehydrogenase gene was amplified from Bacillus sp. YX-1
genome according to its conserved sequences in Bacillus sp. The recombinant
enzyme was over-expressed in E. coli and purified by HisTrap HP affinity
chromatography. The purified enzyme were characterized.
RESULTS: The glucose dehydrogenase gene contains an open reading frame of 786 bp 
encoding 261 amino acids. The maximum activity was observed at 45 degrees C and
pH 8.0. The recombinant enzyme was highly resistant to several organic solvents. 
More than 90% of the activity was maintained when the enzyme was incubated in 50%
cyclohexane, octane, decane at home temperature for 1 h. In addition, the enzyme 
displayed broad substrate spectrum and has catalytic activity for several sugars 
to afford reduced coenzymes. It exhibits similar capability to regenerate either 
NADH or NADPH with specific activity of 8.37 U/mg and 8.62 U/mg for NAD+ and
NADP+.
CONCLUSION: The organic solvent-tolerant glucose dehydrogenase was explored
successfully on the basis of bioinformatics analysis. The work supplied a new
biocatalyst for the cofactor-regeneration during the reaction in organic phases
catalyzed by oxidoreductases.

PMID: 24028058  [PubMed - in process]


97. Front Physiol. 2013 Sep 4;4:213. doi: 10.3389/fphys.2013.00213.

Bridging the gap between computation and clinical biology: validation of cable
theory in humans.

Finlay MC, Xu L, Taggart P, Hanson B, Lambiase PD.

Department of Cardiac Electrophysiology, The Heart Hospital, Institute of
Cardiovascular Science, University College London London, UK.

Introduction: Computerized simulations of cardiac activity have significantly
contributed to our understanding of cardiac electrophysiology, but techniques of 
simulations based on patient-acquired data remain in their infancy. We sought to 
integrate data acquired from human electrophysiological studies into
patient-specific models, and validated this approach by testing whether
electrophysiological responses to sequential premature stimuli could be predicted
in a quantitatively accurate manner. Methods: Eleven patients with structurally
normal hearts underwent electrophysiological studies. Semi-automated analysis was
used to reconstruct activation and repolarization dynamics for each electrode.
This S 2 extrastimuli data was used to inform individualized models of cardiac
conduction, including a novel derivation of conduction velocity restitution.
Activation dynamics of multiple premature extrastimuli were then predicted from
this model and compared against measured patient data as well as data derived
from the ten-Tusscher cell-ionic model. Results: Activation dynamics following a 
premature S 3 were significantly different from those after an S 2. Patient
specific models demonstrated accurate prediction of the S 3 activation wave,
(Pearson's R (2) = 0.90, median error 4%). Examination of the modeled conduction 
dynamics allowed inferences into the spatial dispersion of activation delay.
Further validation was performed against data from the ten-Tusscher cell-ionic
model, with our model accurately recapitulating predictions of repolarization
times (R (2) = 0.99). Conclusions: Simulations based on clinically acquired data 
can be used to successfully predict complex activation patterns following
sequential extrastimuli. Such modeling techniques may be useful as a method of
incorporation of clinical data into predictive models.

PMCID: PMC3761165
PMID: 24027527  [PubMed]


98. Evol Bioinform Online. 2013 Sep 1;9:343-53. doi: 10.4137/EBO.S12751.

POPBAM: Tools for Evolutionary Analysis of Short Read Sequence Alignments.

Garrigan D.

Department of Biology, University of Rochester, Rochester, New York 14627 USA.

BACKGROUND: While many bioinformatics tools currently exist for assembling and
discovering variants from next-generation sequence data, there are very few tools
available for performing evolutionary analyses from these data. Evolutionary and 
population genomics studies hold great promise for providing valuable insights
into natural selection, the effect of mutations on phenotypes, and the origin of 
species. Thus, there is a need for an extensible and flexible computational tool 
that can function into a growing number of evolutionary bioinformatics pipelines.
RESULTS: This paper describes the POPBAM software, which is a comprehensive set
of computational tools for evolutionary analysis of whole-genome alignments
consisting of multiple individuals, from multiple populations or species. POPBAM 
works directly from BAM-formatted assembly files, calls variant sites, and
calculates a variety of commonly used evolutionary sequence statistics. POPBAM is
designed primarily to perform analyses in sliding windows across chromosomes or
scaffolds. POPBAM accurately measures nucleotide diversity, population
divergence, linkage disequilibrium, and the frequency spectrum of mutations from 
two or more populations. POPBAM can also produce phylogenetic trees of all
samples in a BAM file. Finally, I demonstrate that the implementation of POPBAM
is both fast and memory-efficient, and also can feasibly scale to the analysis of
large BAM files with many individuals and populations. Software: The POPBAM
program is written in C/C++ and is available from
http://dgarriga.github.io/POPBAM. The program has few dependencies and can be
built on a variety of Linux platforms. The program is open-source and users are
encouraged to participate in the development of this resource.

PMCID: PMC3767577
PMID: 24027417  [PubMed]


99. J Agric Biol Environ Stat. 2013 Mar 1;18(1):22-38.

Approximate and Pseudo-Likelihood Analysis for Logistic Regression Using External
Validation Data to Model Log Exposure.

Lyles RH, Kupper LL.

Department of Biostatistics and Bioinformatics, The Rollins School of Public
Health of Emory University, 1518 Clifton Rd. N.E., Mailstop 1518-002-3AA,
Atlanta, GA 30322, USA.

A common goal in environmental epidemiologic studies is to undertake logistic
regression modeling to associate a continuous measure of exposure with binary
disease status, adjusting for covariates. A frequent complication is that
exposure may only be measurable indirectly, through a collection of
subject-specific variables assumed associated with it. Motivated by a specific
study to investigate the association between lung function and exposure to metal 
working fluids, we focus on a multiplicative-lognormal structural measurement
error scenario and approaches to address it when external validation data are
available. Conceptually, we emphasize the case in which true untransformed
exposure is of interest in modeling disease status, but measurement error is
additive on the log scale and thus multiplicative on the raw scale.
Methodologically, we favor a pseudo-likelihood (PL) approach that exhibits fewer 
computational problems than direct full maximum likelihood (ML) yet maintains
consistency under the assumed models without necessitating small exposure effects
and/or small measurement error assumptions. Such assumptions are required by
computationally convenient alternative methods like regression calibration (RC)
and ML based on probit approximations. We summarize simulations demonstrating
considerable potential for bias in the latter two approaches, while supporting
the use of PL across a variety of scenarios. We also provide accessible
strategies for obtaining adjusted standard errors to accompany RC and PL
estimates.

PMCID: PMC3766852
PMID: 24027381  [PubMed]


100. J Virol. 2013 Sep 11. [Epub ahead of print]

Antibody Recognition of the Pandemic H1N1 Influenza Hemagglutinin Receptor
Binding Site.

Hong M, Lee PS, Hoffman RM, Zhu X, Krause JC, Laursen NS, Yoon SI, Song L, Tussey
L, Crowe JE Jr, Ward AB, Wilson IA.

Department of Integrative Structural and Computational Biology.

Influenza virus is a global health concern due to its unpredictable pandemic
potential. This potential threat was realized in 2009 when an H1N1 virus emerged 
that resembled the 1918 virus in antigenicity, but fortunately was not nearly as 
deadly. 5J8 is a human antibody that potently neutralizes a broad spectrum of
H1N1 viruses, including the 1918 and 2009 pandemic viruses. Here, we present the 
crystal structure of 5J8 Fab in complex with a bacterially expressed and refolded
globular head domain from the hemagglutinin (HA) of the A/California/07/2009
(H1N1) pandemic virus. 5J8 recognizes a conserved epitope in and around the
receptor binding site (RBS) and its HCDR3 closely mimics interactions of the
sialic acid receptor. EM reconstructions of 5J8 Fab in complex with an HA trimer 
from a 1986 H1 strain and with an engineered stabilized HA trimer from the 2009
H1 pandemic virus showed a similar mode of binding. As for other characterized
RBS-targeted antibodies, 5J8 uses avidity to extend its breadth and affinity
against divergent H1 strains. 5J8 selectively interacts with HA insertion residue
133a, which is conserved in pandemic H1 strains and has precluded binding of
other RBS-targeted antibodies. Thus, the RBS of divergent HAs is targeted by 5J8 
and adds to the growing arsenal of common recognition motifs for design of
therapeutics and vaccines. Moreover, consistent with previous studies,
bacterially expressed H1 HA properly refolds, retaining its antigenic structure, 
and presents a low-cost and rapid alternative for engineering and manufacturing
candidate flu vaccines.

PMID: 24027321  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]

</pre></body></html>